{title} Remarks to the DLC National Conversation {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} Al Gore {/speaker}
{date} July 15, 2000 {/date}
{source} http://www.algore.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}


{speech} 

Thank you all very much. Thank you. Thank you very much. If you're from the north, you can sit down now. If you're from the south, you can sit down now. Thank you very much. 

I told -- I told Wellington, I've never seen that done before. I appreciate that very much. I'll have to remember that one. You know, I see Wellington Webb everywhere. That's why -- you know, you've heard of the worldwide Webb? {LAUGHTER} He is really getting around, I'm telling you. And I also want to compliment Mayor Webb on his great leadership of Denver. He's really doing a terrific job. And I want to thank my friend Al From, I'll say some more about Al a little bit later, but what you have done, Al, is just extraordinary, and to those of you in this room, I look around -- I was standing up here waiting for this to start and I was recognizing all the faces of good friends and compatriots that I fought many battles alongside and we've done some good for this country. And I'm really proud of what you all have done in hanging in there and working so hard. 

I bring you greetings from Tipper, incidentally. She's campaigning today in California and it's been a big year for us. We just celebrated our 30th wedding anniversary just not seven weeks ago. {APPLAUSE} And last night, while my daughter Karenna was out making speeches on my behalf, I was babysitting our grandson and he just turned one on July 4th. He had excellent timing last year. 

Now, let me just tell you a quick story. You know that grandparents are prone to brag on their grandchildren. Any other grandparents here? Alright. Anybody have as many as five grandchildren? Ten? Ten, really? Well, give me some advice afterwards, I'm just a rookie. What I've learned so far is that evidently the preferred technique is just to give that grandchildren whatever he wants and then if that causes any problems, give him back to his parents. And that's what we did after his birthday party on July 4th. 

But now, I started to tell you that grandparents are prone to brag, am I right? You probably got pictures with you, don't you? Okay. Well, now, I have been bragging on my grandson about how bright he is and I just have some evidence and you judge for yourself. This is a true story. The other day, it was the day of the -- it was the day after the NBA championship game. And I was watching the game. My daughter called me the night before. The next morning, early, I was eating breakfast and the phone rang. And I picked it up and said hello and I heard a baby's voice and the more I listened I recognized my grandson's voice. And I said "hello, hello." And apparently my voice came through the speaker phone because Karenna came from the other room and picked it up and said "Dad?" And I said "Karenna?" And she said "oh, my gosh, Wyatt has called you on the telephone." {LAUGHTER} And she said "I didn't even know we had a redial button on this phone." Well, does that make the point? {APPLAUSE} 

You know, you might argue that he was just playing around with that toy and happened to press that button. I don't think that for a minute. {LAUGHTER} I think he wanted to talk to me. 

In any case, it really is great to be here and I want to thank Mayor Martin O'Malley for being such a great host to all of us. This is my second visit this week to Baltimore. {APPLAUSE} He is really coming on like gangbusters. It's great. Did you all like that City stat program? Wasn't that good? Don't you want one? Well, the National Performance Review has, by coincidence, been working on that same system. A mayor out in Redlands, California is working on something similar. And I don't think anybody has done as good a job with it as Mayor O'Malley. But I really recommend that those of you who are local elected officials take that idea back and make it work. And we have a federal government task force that has been working for two years now to come up with a kind of a franchise, cookie-cutter pattern that you can use to put that into effect in your cities if you want to. 

I want to thank my friend, Congressman Jim Moran, and I don't know all of the other elected officials here, but I know there are a bunch of you. And I just wanted to tell you what's on my mind here today because less than four months from today Americans will go to the polls to choose a new president. Now, some would have us believe that this election is about little more than personalities and photo opportunities. But you and I know that nothing could be further from the truth. For fifteen years now, the DLC has been dedicated to the idea that the people's best interests have to come before any special interests. That the party of the people has to constantly search for new ways to put its enduring values into action for rapidly-changing times. That people deserve a government that is on their side. 

I believe that fundament cause is very much at stake in this election. In fact, I believe that everything the DLC and the Democratic Party stands for is at stake in this election. You remember what it was like more than 15 years ago when we started the DLC. I remember it vividly. Some of you have heard Al From tell the story. It was a cold winter for the Democratic Party. America was in the midst of a supply-side spending spree. Our country was mired in deficits, racked with not only debt, but also doubt. It was unable or unwilling to meet the cares and concerns of hardworking families, because of the leadership in control. 

Meanwhile, in a small room on Capitol Hill, two guys named Al sat scribbling out a press release that announced the formation of the DLC. You remember that day, don't you? There's the other Al, right over there. {APPLAUSE} 

Now, this is a movement that has been given a lot of names over the years since that day. But at its heart, it was simple common sense. We were just sick and tired of a government that was frozen in the ice of old assumptions, while people worked longer for less and the American dream seemed further and further out of reach. 

We had had enough of a government that lavished new loop-holes on every powerful interest you can name, but somehow couldn't make the most basic investments in its own people to give them a chance to make their own lives better. 

Well, needless to say, things got worse before they got better. In fact, by the time President Clinton and I took office, all that ice of old assumptions had hardened into a frozen tundra covered by the highest deficits in history. A quadrupled national debt. The deepest recession since the 1930s. Crime and welfare both rising out of control. Now, that's the true legacy from the Bush-Quayle years and let's don't forget that when the other party meets in Philadelphia in a few weeks. 

Their basic problem was the way that they've handled, or rather didn't handle all the pressure from the special interests who made demands that they couldn't reconcile with one another. And even when their new tax loop-holes and new pork barrel spending proposals pushed the deficits into completely uncharted territory, they still couldn't find a way to declare their independence from the special interests. But by 1992, Americans were ready to ring the Liberty Bell. With help and intellectual firepower from many in this room, we brought a change to this nation. And as a result, today we celebrate the single longest economic expansion in all of American history -- 22 million new jobs. {APPLAUSE} Unemployment -- down, inflation -- down, welfare rolls -- cut in half, crime -- down in every category. 

We're moving in the right direction. And the federal government is the smallest that is has been since John Kennedy sat in the Oval Office, because we've been reinventing it. We got a long way to go. But we're making progress by applying that same common sense at the core of the DLC to the process of self governance. 

Now, what's the reaction to the -- of the other side to all of this? Well, instead of rejoicing in our nation's unprecedented economic success, our opponents seem actually to be -- to feel a little put out by this record. Have you noticed that? They try to minimize it. They scan the horizon for any dark cloud that they can find. And when they find it's impossible to minimize this success, then they labor to explain it all away somehow. They say that the credit for all of our success goes to the hard work of the American people. Yes, of course it does. Absolutely. But let's remind out opponents that when they were in power, the American people were working just as hard then, too. But their hard work was undone by a government that didn't work, a government that got it wrong and kept getting in the way. That's what was changed to unleash the potential of the new economy. 

We succeeded because we put government on the side of hard-working Americans again. And I think we all know the basic ingredients of today's prosperity and progress. Fiscal discipline as the foundation, but also smart targeted investments in the best enterprise of all -- Americans, themselves. Without the right fiscal policies, we could never have freed ourselves from the bad choices of the past. And without the right investments in education, in training, in research and technology. We could never have given people the tools to thrive on their own initiative. 

Well, I'm running for president because I love this country and I am not going to see us dragged back to the tired old thinking that nearly destroyed the American dream in the past. {APPLAUSE} I'm running for president because I want to serve the people. All the people. And not the narrow needs of the special interests. I'm running for president because I want to empower Americans, each and every American. And I want to give them the tools to build their own futures, make their own choices, and make our economy and our country even better. 

I believe very deeply in the power of the American people. And that is why empowerment is the heart of my approach. We need a president who is willing to stand up and take on the special interests. But we also have to give every family the tools and skills to stand up and fight for themselves. So let's consider the basic choice in this election. And how we can put that philosophy into action. We have to start with fiscal discipline and let me just pledge to you, with your help, as president, I will never ever be profligate with the people's money. I'll balance the budget every year. And put America on the path to eliminating our national debt completely by the year 2012. {APPLAUSE} 

In this year of unprecedented productivity gains, we've got far better uses for capital than tying it up in sterile government paper. If we use our surpluses wisely, we can afford a series of targeted tax cuts, the kind that let families live out their own values, and take more control over their own lives. Tax cuts to buy health care, to pay for child care, to save for college and life-long learning. You know, we're in a knowledge economy. That's why we need to invest much more. And I would a whole lot rather have targeted tax cuts to help working families than a massive tax cut that primarily benefits the wealthy. That kind of policy would drive us right back into a deficit and fiscal nightmare. And then you and I would have to start all over again. And we're not going to do that. We're going to do it the right way. {APPLAUSE} 

I can just see it now. Al and I would have to sit down again and write out a brand new press-release. But what I'm proposing instead is that we use this prosperity as a foundation to move on farther and higher. I think we need to move to the next stage of fiscal discipline, which means not just living within our means, but lifting the burdens left by those who came before. Then, we need the next generation of investments to further empower our people for the 21st century. And empowerment means that every child in every school district, suburban or urban, rich or poor, will be able to count on a high-quality public education. We need greater investment and greater accountability and more public school choice and competition. We need to start treating teachers like the professionals that they are. And give them smaller class sizes and new resources along with the new accountability and reform. {APPLAUSE} 

In the new economy, we know that opportunity is another word for education. But too many of our people now never get the skills that they need. I meet business leaders all across this country - some of them are probably here today -- who cannot even fill the good new jobs that are opening up right now. Jobs that pay $100,000 a year or more. And they put the want ads in the newspaper and they describe some new software or some skill that you can't get unless you get training. Training you can't take unless you have education. Sixty percent of the businesses in America are in that situation today. No wonder so many of them are pushing every year to bring in more skilled workers from abroad to fill those jobs that folks here can't compete for. 

Now, we're a nation of immigrants and we proudly welcome new Americans in each generation. Don't get me wrong. But I think it's time to make sure that Americans who are born and raised and educated here have a chance to compete for the best jobs, right here, right now, let's vow to make our schools the very best in the world. There's no excuse for not doing it. 

Empowerment also means that critical health decisions must be made on the basis of the best medicine for you and your family, not the cheapest or quickest procedure. Right now, too many life or death decisions are being made by young bureaucrats working for HMOs and insurance companies who don't have a license to practice medicine and who don't have a right to play God. And that has to change. I think it's time to take the medical decisions away from the HMOs, the accountants and the insurance companies and give them back to the doctors and the nurses and the health care professionals. That shouldn't be a controversial or complicated matter. {APPLAUSE} 

Empowerment also means that our seniors are not left powerless in their old age, forced to choose between food and prescription medicine. We need to tell the drug companies that it's time to do the right thing. We need a real prescription drug benefit for all of our seniors under Medicare. Not a pretend plan that even the insurance industry has said publicly will not work. We need to fix that problem. And there are many reasons why. 

Now, how do we fix things like this? Well, empowerment means using the power of free markets, not big bureaucracies or onerous regulations to free ourselves forever from influences that take away our right of self determination. You could say the same thing about the problems with energy and the dominance of foreign oil -- sixty-percent of our imports, big oil companies. I propose a new Energy Security and Environment Trust which will speak the development of cleaner, more fuel-efficient cars and products, modernize aging power systems, and bring people more choice and more competition from clean cars that get 80 miles to the gallon to targeted tax cuts that help people afford more energy-efficient homes and appliances. 

The DLC has been in the forefront of spreading the good news that we can create a cleaner environment and a stronger economy at the same time. The export market in a world that features many cities choking on pollution levels far above what we have here in the United States, that market is ravenous for the new generation of technologies that we ought to be making and selling right here, creating good new jobs at the same time we reduce pollution level. 

Now, also empowerment means that people have the choice to save and invest for their own retirements and to do so on top of the unshakable foundation of Social Security. 

I have proposed a new retirement savings plan that matches families' contributions the same way large employers do in their pension programs. It lets even struggling families build bigger nest eggs for the future. This plan, which has been very favorably received from all points on the ideological spectrum -- there was an author from the Heritage Foundation the other day that wrote an op ed column saying this is the first proposal that would actually address the low savings rate by getting an opportunity for working families to start saving and investment. This plan will help put an end to the days when savings are a scramble, if not an unthinkable luxury for too many families. We will make savings one of the easiest things a family can ever do. And I commend this plan to all of you for your scrutiny and attention. 

Here's how it'll work. For a married couple making $30,000 a year, we'll match every dollar they save with three dollars deposited right into their account. If a you ng couple saves just $20 a week, they could reasonably expect to have by the time they retire many years later as much as $400,000 extra. Now this will insure that millions more families can open the door to their dreams. Think of this as Social Security plus, not Social Security minus. It is the best of both worlds, not the worst of both. You get all the advantages of increased private investment. But no matter how the market performs, your Social Security will always be there for you. That's what was intended from the beginning, to have a safety net in case the market goes badly, in case other things go badly. 

And in this day and time with the increasing number of seniors and the fast-growing retirement population, we need to save and strengthen Social Security. And I'm committed to doing so. But I do not believe we should privatize Social Security. {APPLAUSE} That would take the trust right out of the trust fund, draining away a trillion dollars that is needed to pay Social Security for today's retirees. 

Now I believe there needs to be a Social Security and Medicare lockbox with a sign on it that says "Hands off, politicians!" That ought to be the law, because, otherwise, they'll always be tempted to use those programs as a piggybank. As President, I will veto the use of any money from Social Security and Medicare for anything other than Social Security and Medicare. {APPLAUSE} 

Incidentally, for those of you might not have had a chance to look at the Social Security privatization plan that my opponent has put forward, the way it's described by his aides, it would divert about 16% of the money that flows into the trust fund into the stock market, two percentage points out of the 12.4 points, 16%. Now Social Security has always been a transfer from the generation now working to the generation retired. So if you divert 16% of the money, you've got to cut every Social Security check by 16% unless you come up with some way to replace all that money that's been diverted. Now that amounts to a trillion dollars over 10 years. Where is it coming from? Bigger budget deficits? If it came from the trust fund, then the trust fund would go bankrupt in short order. If it comes from the rest of the budget, then the whole economy goes into deficit and the prosperity and progress come to a screeching halt. 

The other problem is that for those younger workers who are the intended beneficiaries of the diversion, you've got so much that's being invested by so many people, you've got a lot of transaction costs, but beyond that, there're going to be some winners -- there would be some winners and some losers. What happens to the losers? Well, I'll tell you what would happen. There would be an immediate build-up of political pressure to bail them out the way it's been done with the so-called Freedom to Farm Law, which has been such a catastrophe, supposedly market based. It has led to the largest taxpayer subsidies in the history of agricultural policy. 

Well, if you think Freedom to Farm was expensive to bail out, wait till you see freedom to lose your Social Security. Congress would be falling all over itself to make up those losses, because they would come from the basic foundation that's supposed to be the safety net, taking away all of the so-called savings that are promised there. So I think it's a serious mistake. 

Now, for my part, I have been very clear since the day I began this campaign about what I am proposing: an economic policy that's tried and tested and built on our values. Fiscal discipline is a foundation, a new generation of investments, the empowerment of our people, and the unleashing of their potential. No runaway spending, no paybacks for the powerful interests, no budget-busting tax proposals. And this is the approach that the DLC has championed ever since its founding: hard-nosed budgets, smart, big-hearted investments, but no bottleneck bureaucracies. That's the balance that works. 

Now if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, then Governor Bush must be trying to flatter the DLC every time he steps out on the campaign trail. {APPLAUSE} He now tries to invoke the vocabulary of the mainstream. But he proposes a tax plan that would consume the entire budget surplus and then some, despite his repeated reassurances not to worry; it'll all add up in the end. 

Well, we don't need his rhetoric; we have his record. As America begins this new century with the biggest surpluses in the history of our nation, Texas's budget surpluses are rolling away like tumbleweed. One year ago with our national economy roaring along, Texas had its biggest surplus ever. But today with our national economy still roaring along, Texas faces a serious budget shortfall with huge deficits in its health care and criminal justice systems. The state surplus is as good as gone. 

Well, you might ask how did this happen. Well, I just happen to have the answer for you. {LAUGHTER} Last year, Governor Bush pushed through a $1.7 billion tax cut that served the powerful interests instead of the people. 

Now, you might think that a governor whose state ranks dead last in the entire nation for families with health coverage, who then gets a surplus courtesy of the national economic boom, might turn his attention to moving from number 50 to, say, 45, or maybe even better. But, no. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} I'm going to tell it like it is. Instead of taking up legislation to help families that desperately need health care, many of them going across the border to Mexico to try to find health care, instead of taking up, proposing legislation to help them, Governor Bush made a big tax break for the oil industry the very first bill that he signs that year. 

Now, I don't really know how many oil executives in Texas lack health insurance. {LAUGHTER} But I can tell you this. A lot of children in Texas do. Listen to these statistics. 

Texas is 50th for women without health insurance, 49th for children without health insurance, and more than half of the children who are not covered are Latino. Texas is the worst in the nation for industrial pollution, one of the primary causes for respiratory diseases, because he put the polluters in charge of enforcing the environmental laws. Now who here thinks that he has the right priorities. 

Now this week as Governor Bush was traveling from photo op to photo op trying to put the compassion into his conservatism, we learned that he failed to use tens of millions of dollars budgeted to feed poor and hungry children during the summer months. Less than one in ten children who receive school lunches during the school year are receiving them this summer. Now just because school is out doesn't mean that hunger takes a summer vacation, or that leadership can go on leave. 

This goes to our values. Hungry children need food, not photo ops. But it's also about leadership. When he was asked why Texas was suddenly facing such a big shortfall, Governor Bush told the Dallas Morning News, and I quote, "I hope I'm not here to have to deal with it." {LAUGHTER} That was my reaction when I heard that. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} Now seriously, with all due respect to Governor Bush, America can't afford to deal with it either. 

Let me tell you. He may try to mimic some of the rhetoric of the DLC, but he has missed the core point. Opportunity and responsibility go together. You can duck responsibility and expect a new opportunity. {APPLAUSE} 

Governor Bush gave some nice-sounding speeches this week. But we really can't go back to the days of deficits and debt and economic decline. We cannot simply ignore the hard won lessons of the past eight years. I believe that it is long past time for us to take the basic formula that we know works very well and build on the foundation of the unprecedented prosperity and progress that America is enjoying today, and then take it on much farther and make this the beginning of a new era. 

So if you want to keep our prosperity going and fight for fiscal policies that work, then I ask you to join with me. If you believe in an America that closes out not just its material debts, but its moral debts as well, where families get the best quality health care, where our kids can breathe free of pollution and smog, where our parents and grandparents can live out their lives in peace and plenty, where we close the racial divide and create opportunity for all, then I ask you to join with me. 

Our nation has done well these past eight years. We owe a great deal of our progress to the people in this room. But I'm here to tell you today you ain't seen nothin' yet. {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} 

We're moving on. I ask for your help, for your votes, for your enthusiasm. And I ask you to let yourselves believe that we can do the right thing and be the better for it. I ask you to come with me, and we will finish the journey we started 15 years ago and bring America to the mountaintop of our ideals. Let's do it together. 

God bless you. Thank you. Let's win this struggle. Thank you.

{/speech} 
