{title} Remarks by the President and the Vice President at Dnc Dinner {/title}
{event} Ritz-Carlton, Amelia Island, Florida {/event}
{speaker} Al Gore {/speaker}
{date} November 1, 1997 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Thank you very much. Well, I sure didn't expect to stand up here and listen to that, and I sure do appreciate it very much. You weren't supposed to -- I mean, the whole point of why they asked you to flip the order was so that you wouldn't speak -- {LAUGHTER} -- to save your voice. And you went ahead and spoke, and thank you very much, Mr. President. I'm touched by the kind words.

And, of course, ladies and gentlemen, you can probably get a clear sense of how meaningful this friendship is to the two of us. And I know that many of you have had the great blessing of having a really close friend with whom you work on a regular basis, and when you take on challenges that are just really tough and you have somebody to talk with who understands and who is right there without any question, just as a teammate and partner, that's the kind of friendship that we have had.

Of course, the burdens and duties that this President has on his shoulders are just unimaginable. And that's true of any President, of course, but it's been such a privilege for me to watch at close hand and see how he conducts the business of this country and to see how he handles these challenges. And it's really a great privilege.

You know, the two of us feel so much gratitude to those of you here for making it possible for this President and his team to take on these challenges. And I want to thank Roy Romer, our general chairman of the DNC, and his wife, Bea Romer. Roy, thank you for the speech today; thank you for your leadership of the party; and thank you for all the hard work and effort that you're putting into this.

Likewise, Steve Grossman, thank you. As our national chair, you are right there every day making the tough decisions, moving us forward. We're very grateful to you as well.

And to all of the talented team at the DNC, our national victory fund chairman, Dan Dutko; our DNC treasurer Carol Pensky, who was just here on stage, and her husband David; to Cynthia Freedman, our women's leadership forum chair; to Tom Hendrickson, the Democratic Business Council chair who is here with his wife Jill; Alan Solomont, our national finance chair; and to all of the other members of the team -- and especially this weekend, to our DNC retreat chair Walter Shorenstein, thank you very much, Walter, for making this weekend an extraordinary and unforgettable experience. We're very grateful to you. {APPLAUSE}

And I'm looking forward to Art Garfunkel and Billy Porter. We're going to have some great entertainment after dinner. {APPLAUSE}

Let me just say a few words first on behalf of the President, both about politics and about the future of our country. We are witnessing a great contest between two sets of ideas and we have the privilege of having had a test of both sets of ideas and we can assess how well the ideas have served our nation.

But we also have a political struggle, and the outcome of this struggle will depend in many ways on you. But in looking at where we have come under the leadership of President Clinton, we often talk about the economic recovery and all the success in our nation, but look at what has happened politically. You know, for a quarter century, the Republican Party raised doubts about the ability of Democrats to handle fiscal policy, to handle the budget, to bring crime rates down, to keep our military strong, to reduce the welfare rolls. They drove a wedge between Democrats and the middle class.

Well, that was never the party that we knew. But in the last five years, we have proved that those charges and allegations were just nonsense, because in political terms what President Bill Clinton has done is nothing short of revolutionary. The entire political landscape has been transformed.

The American people know that Democrats are responsible for reducing the budget deficit from $300 billion down to $22 billion this year on the way to a balanced budget, that Democrats have been responsible for bringing all the crime rates down in every single category for five years in a row, putting all those new community police officers on the street, emphasizing prevention programs, building the strength of the communities.

The American people understand that Democrats have managed the government well, reduced its size to the lowest level in 30 years and improved its efficiency in the process. Democrats have reduced the welfare rolls and put people back to work. Democrats have handled our nation's business so well that we have had the longest sustained economic recovery in more than a generation. It is a success that Democrats deserve credit for. {APPLAUSE}

Now, the point in political terms is that we have won back the trust and confidence of the middle class in this country. And that is a remarkable achievement. Look, by contrast, at what's going on in the Republican Party. They talk constantly among themselves about how they do not have an agenda. They have the same kind of bickering that they used to point do in the Democratic Party a quarter century ago, over on the right. While they're so disorganized, the right hand doesn't know what the far right hand is doing. And they're fighting among themselves. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

Their vision for the future is right out of Jurassic Park -- they would turn the clock back. Incidentally, last Sunday we all felt, Saturday night, like Republicans for just one brief dark moment as we turned the clocks back with the end of Daylight Savings Time. {LAUGHTER} But the country doesn't want to turn the clock back 50 years, and that's what the Republican agenda would do.

They're at each other's throats because they are competing with one another for the affections of the far right-wing fringe. And their agenda is being driven by those elements in the party that hold them hostage. And it's scary to think, here, the day after Halloween, it's scary to think what they would really propose if they were to once again be in control of the White House.

We cannot let that happen. We've seen what they tried to do when they acquired control of the Congress. And whenever they could not convince the country to accept their proposals through the normal constitutional processes, the right wing has ginned them up to take hostages. And so they shut the government down -- twice.

President Bill Clinton, of course, as is now legendary, backed them down and forced them to retreat. But they didn't learn their lesson. When North Dakota had that devastating 500-year flood and was in desperate need of relief, they shut down the relief to North Dakota in order to try to blackmail the country into accepting yet another part of their agenda. Now, they're shutting down the confirmation process for judges on the Courts of Appeal because, again, one of their right-wing groups wants to prevent the filling of these judgeships around the country with anybody that does not agree with their right-wing approach.

So it's a very high-stakes battle. And they know they do not have the American people on their side, so they're trying to win by hook and by crook with political sleight of hand and massive infusions of money into the process -- like on Staten Island, for example, where -- I guess Roy talked a little bit earlier today.

By contrast, as I said, we've won back the confidence of the middle class. And in the famous saying on the front of the Archives, the past is prologue, and the American people understand that the performance under President Bill Clinton during these past five years is what the country can expect by continuing these policies in a Congress that is once again Democratic. Never forget that the economic recovery and the transformation of America's economic and financial fortunes came about because of the adoption of President Clinton's plan, without a single Republican vote -- not one in the House, not one in the Senate.

And what has happened as a result is truly remarkable. You know, the President referred to these new figures yesterday. Just let it sink in a minute. Growth went up again, while inflation went down again. That's kind of what you want. That's a combination that we just convinced ourselves was impossible during the long, dark years of Republican rule, where almost every day there was more distressing economic news about the deficit going through the roof, and businesses had no confidence in the future because every time they thought they felt a little strength in the economy and tried to borrow money to expand or hire new people they ran headlong into that government demand for credit and drove interest rates up and the economic recovery shorted out before it even got started.

The Bible has a passage, "they built an ambush for themselves." Well, under Republican economic policies they built an ambush for every potential economic recovery we attempted. It shorted out because of its internal contradictions. And the policy contradictions that the Republicans inflicted on this nation mirrored the internal political contradictions inside the Republican Party. It's not coherent. And so they tried to put in place policies to satisfy the various groups, even though they are internally contradictory. And the result for the country is confusion and dissidence and poor performance.

Now, of all the things that have been written about the success of President Clinton's policies, the one thing I think has received too little emphasis is the extent to which this President, beginning even before he was President, assembled the best thinkers in our party to put together a coherent set of policies that would be good for America across the board. It's not an accident that all this good news is happening all at the same time, because the policies fit together.

When the crime rates go down in our cities, that works hand in glove with our community empowerment strategy and our brownfields approach to bring new investment into the cities. When we have a sound economic policy that drives interest rates down and stimulates new investment, that works hand in glove with the increased investment we have made with public funds in research and development and science and technology and the Information Superhighway and the new technologies that are making us more productive. That in turn works hand in glove with the President's efforts to open new markets around the world, to have this huge increase in exports from this nation to the rest of the world, with high-paying jobs increasing rapidly as we go out to sell goods and services to the 96 percent of the world's consumers that are outside the United States of America. It is a coherent agenda that is working extremely well for the United States of America.

Now, if it were ideas alone that determined the outcome of political contests, then it would be all over. They would have to call the fight. They'd have to say this is no contest. But that's not the way it works, and thank goodness you all understand that, because a clearly superior agenda may not be selected and chosen if those who believe in it are not willing to fight for it, if there is not a requisite level of intensity being put behind those policies.

What is so interesting about the current political landscape is that even though the Republicans are incoherent, even though they are presenting an agenda to the country that does not make sense and failed the nation in the past, they, nevertheless, have a lot of people who feel very intensely that they want to win, and they're fighting very hard. So a lot of times they will pull out a victory in a political race purely on the basis of extra resources and more fight.

So that's why we're here this weekend, to talk about the ideas. And I look forward to participating in the panel discussions tomorrow, incidentally, and I've heard wonderful reports about all of the ideas exchanged here already and I'm really eager to participate in these sessions tomorrow. But, in addition, we're talking with one another about how we can match the intensity on the other side with an even greater intensity of effort on the part of those of us who believe deeply that politics is about more than just winning and losing. It really is about the future of this country.

So your willingness to come here and to identify yourselves as leaders for the future, to be willing to be a part of this winning team is something that we really appreciate more than we can tell you. It is great to have a friend, as I began by saying, and both the President and I feel the same way about your friendship to the Democratic Party and to the people of the United States of America. We're grateful to you and we look forward to fighting alongside you and winning in the future.

Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen, for being here. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
