{title} Remarks by the President and the Vice President at Reinventing Government Anniversary Event {/title}
{event} The South Lawn {/event}
{speaker} Al Gore {/speaker}
{date} September 14, 1994 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for joining us on this occasion. I appreciate all the solicitude on my crutches and my cast. It's not true that I did this dancing with Tipper here in the front row. {LAUGHTER} The doctor said I'll have this cast for another five months, and I'll have to wear the old full-body cast for another two years. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

I told somebody the other day that since I was under anesthesia for almost 90 minutes, I formally transferred the powers of my office as Vice President to the Speaker of the House; and when I regained consciousness, Speaker Foley was restored to full power. {LAUGHTER}

I want to welcome all of the heroes of reinvention who are here, all of our distinguished guests, members of the Cabinet, members of the administration, members -- heads of agencies and departments who have been implementing these recommendations, federal employees who have made all the difference in making all of this possible in giving us the ideas and then in helping us implement the ideas.

And I want to say, first of all, that one year ago here on the South Lawn, I presented the report of the National Performance Review to President Clinton. The report said that if we followed a few simple principles, such as putting customers first, empowering employees and cutting red tape, we could create a government that works better and costs less. We symbolically cut some red tape on the way in here, but we've been cutting the real thing over the past year at a remarkable rate. There is still a lot to go, just as there's still a lot of the symbolic red tape in these laundry baskets there. But we're making a lot of progress, and this is a status report at the one-year mark.

In the first year since we published the report, federal civil servants, members of President Clinton's administration, and the President himself have been cutting red tape and have been working extremely hard to turn the National Performance Review into reality.

As you can see, there is a lot left to do, and we're talking about that, too. Today, we're releasing a formal status report on the first year of the National Performance Review. Here's the report in CD-ROM version. It's also available on the Internet and, and for some of us, there is also a book. {LAUGHTER} I commend it to your reading, just as I commended to your reading the original report a year ago. And those who took me up on it got back and said they felt well-rewarded by the experience of reading it.

This is just as readable as the one a year ago, and it gives us the facts and figures of which we're very proud, that show how much progress we have been making.

But as we present the one-year status report on Reinventing Government to the American people today, I would like to emphasize that it is only the first in what we promise will be many installments toward the goal of a government that works better and costs less.

There are two ways to summarize the work that we have done in the past year. One way, the traditional way, is through statistics, some of which you see over here, right to the right. I said from the beginning this would be a seven- to eight-year project. Most of the figures have, in the tradition of the budget document, been calculated in five-year terms. But just in the first year, as you can see, we have already seen action taken on more than 90 percent of the recommendations in last year's report.

Money saved, personnel cuts accomplished, bills passed by Congress -- this is a record of great success. And while I'm talking about the actions taken by Congress, I want to single out the individuals in Congress who have been so remarkably supportive of this and have made it all possible.

First of all, the two committee chairs of the committees with jurisdiction over most of the recommendations in Reinventing Government, Senator John Glenn and Congressman John Conyers. {APPLAUSE} Would the two of you stand, please. {APPLAUSE} I'll tell you, these guys have been wonderful to work with. They and their colleagues have been extremely supportive. And I'm very, very grateful to them.

I want to thank a friend of mine who has been more than a majority leader in helping to put this stuff across. He's been a friend and ally in helping to remove obstacles, the Majority Leader in the House of Representatives, Congressman Dick Gephardt, who is here. We appreciate your work, Dick. Thank you. {APPLAUSE}

I want to acknowledge two other members of Congress who have been extremely helpful on these matters and who are present, Congressman Bill Richardson and Congresswoman Jane Harmon. If the two of them could stand. {APPLAUSE} We appreciate your work very much. {APPLAUSE}

I'm leaving out a bunch of people. I hope I haven't overlooked someone who is also here. Forgive me, it's an oversight if I have.

I'd like to acknowledge the agency heads who are here and who have done such an outstanding job. Alice Rivlin, the Director of OMB who has been a real hero of this. {APPLAUSE} And she's also been heading up the President's Management Council, and every week we work very hard on this. One of my strongest allies, Roger Johnson, head of the GSA -- Roger, thank you for your help and support. {APPLAUSE}

I want to acknowledge several others. From FEMA, James Lee Witt; from SBA Erskine Bowles; from the Social Security Administration Shirley Chater; the acting Customs Director, Sam Banks; Jim King at OPM who's been a real hero and in the vanguard on this material. {APPLAUSE} Peggy Richardson with IRS, whose been just outstanding. Ann Brown with the Consumer Product Safety Commission. Ann, thank you.

And the members of the President's Management Council, in addition to Alice -- Tom Collier at the Interior Department; Mort Downey at Transportation; Dave Barram at Commerce; Hershel Gober at the Veterans Administration; Madeleine Kunin at Education; Richard Moose at the State Department; and Tom Glynn at the Labor Department. We appreciate your work, ladies and gentlemen. {APPLAUSE}

I also want to acknowledge some folks who have been key allies. And when they signed on to really help make this work, some people who didn't really understand what federal employees are all about were surprised. I wasn't surprised after spending a year talking with federal employees in every agency and department, because I already knew that most of these ideas in here are ones that federal employees at the grass-roots level, where the rubber meets the road, have for years been saying -- why don't they do this? Why don't they do it the right way? Don't they understand what makes sense? And so when the representatives of public employees in the public employee unions spoke up and to the surprise of some say, yes, we endorse this, we think this is greatly needed, I was not surprised. But I'm very grateful to them. I'm going to ask three of them to stand who are present -- John Sturdivant with the American Federation of Government Employees; Bob Tobias with the National Treasury Employees' Union; and John Leyden, Secretary Treasurer for Public Employment in the AFL-CIO. Would the three of you gentlemen stand. Thank you, thank you. {APPLAUSE}

You talk about one big change in the prospects for all of this stuff -- it came when the employees and their representatives spoke up loudly and clearly.

So, Mr. President, we can talk about the people who made it possible; we can talk about the facts and figures which are summarized over here. But before we talk about the facts and figures that are usually in this kind of report, I'd like to shift gears and go about this in a different way. I'd like to introduce to you some people who have had firsthand experience on the receiving end with a reinvented government.

Now, I know that this phrase I'm about to use sounds like a contradiction in terms or an oxymoron, to use the fancy word, but I'm going to introduce you to three satisfied citizens. {LAUGHTER} That may sound like a contradiction in terms, but I want to introduce all three of them and then ask the three of them to come and talk to you. First to the microphone will be Emilio Mendoza from San Antonio, Texas. And Dr. Mendoza is the chief executive of a small business called Galactic Technologies, a defense contractor in San Antonio, Texas. Last January, the company ran into cashflow problems and began to think about the cash flow problems and began to think about the SBA. And he's going to come up here in a minute and tell us his experience as a high-tech small business CEO.

Our next speaker will be from big business. Small businesses, like Dr. Mendoza's are not the only ones that are now having the chance to become satisfied customers of the government. Big businesses have been noticing the change, too. So the next person I'd like you to hear from is Mr. Art Torno, managing director of American Airlines, from Miami, Florida. And he'll be up here in a moment.

And our third speaker is from California. Disasters like last January's Northridge earthquake in Southern California can be the time when Americans need their government the most. In the past the government has not always been there when it was needed. Not because there weren't good intentions or hardworking employees, but because the systems were failing them and there were some things that were not enabling them to give the quality service they wanted to give.

But the Federal Emergency Management Agency has been reinvented. So third to speak will be Mrs. Alameda Holstein and her granddaughter Crystal. And we'll ask them to come up here. Mrs. Holstein came from Sylmar, California, to tell us about her experience after last January's major earthquake. And then I'll come back to present the report, the status report to the President and to present the President to this gathering.

Would the three speakers come up here now and give us your presentation please.

Mr. President, there are thousands of stories across our country just like these three stories. And in every case, federal employees who want to do an outstanding job and deliver the highest quality service, but have been trying in vain to unleash those energies in the face of systems that don't work, red tape that ties them in knots, burdens that they have to carry that don't make any sense, now are able to do what they want to do anyway.

For example, the "Low Doc" form -- SBA was able to do that because the leadership and the employees at SBA took a form that looked like that and put it down to one two-sided piece of paper. FEMA -- they were able to provide this quality service because they weren't having to spend hours upon hours filling out needless forms because the innovators at FEMA have now given them small hand-carried notebook computers where they can put the information in instantly and send it electronically overnight and cut the turn-around time to practically nothing -- the same in Customs. Even though the conversations between the regulators and the regulated, the government agencies and the effective business community have been going on for years, now with better systems, with a commitment from management, with a new reinvented government approach, they're able to implement the good ideas that have been there in the private sector and in the minds and hearts of federal employees for quite some time.

This is working. We have a long way to go, but we have made an outstanding start in the first year, and we are going to get this job done. And there's one simple reason why, when you get past all the rest of it. Last year, at this time, President Clinton took the initial report and held it up and said to the country -- everywhere it says the President should, this President will. President Clinton has kept his word. He has delivered the full resources of his administration to the accomplishment of this goal.

And, incidentally, partly because of this, we were able to have the success announced yesterday with the crime bill. This week has illustrated President Clinton's leadership on many issues: national Service, which was just kicked off; the Crime Bill, which was just signed yesterday; and now, the one-year status report on Reinventing Government. It's been one of the most rewarding experiences of my life to be able to work with the federal employees who have made this report possible.

It is my pleasure to present this report to you, Mr. President. And, ladies and gentlemen, it's my great honor to present to you the President of the United States. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
