{title} Remarks By The President at The Business Roundtable {/title}
{event} Business Roundtable {/event}
{speaker} Barack Obama {/speaker}
{date} March 12, 2009 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Thank you so much. Please, everybody have a seat. I want to get to some Q&A as quickly as possible, so let me dive right in. First of all, thank you. It's a pleasure to be here this afternoon. I see a lot of friends in the room. It's especially important, I think, for us to be meeting today with the Business Roundtable, because the companies that you lead account for nearly 10 million jobs and generate trillions of dollars in revenue each year. Your companies have fueled the prosperity of communities across the country and the success stories of countless individuals. They've enriched our nation; they've served as a tribute to the enduring spirit of American capitalism.
But for over three decades, the Business Roundtable is also taking a broader view of your responsibilities as chief executives. You've looked beyond the bottom line and the next quarter to the long-term health of your company. You've not only served as accomplished leaders, but as engaged citizens -- citizens who understand that it is in the interest of both your companies and your country to have a workforce that's highly educated, healthy, and prosperous; to have a market that is free, but also fair; and to live in a nation that's willing to invest in its own future. You understand the public responsibility of private enterprise.
It's fitting, then, that we meet at this moment, because over the last few weeks a spirited debate has emerged in Washington -- a debate over what it will take to ultimately break the back of this recession and strengthen our economy for the long run. It's a debate that centers on one key question: Does the greatest economic crisis in our lifetime warrant extraordinary action to deal with the array of challenges we face? Or should we limit our efforts, and try to deal with them incrementally, or one at a time?
Now, let me say that it was not my preference, believe it or not, to launch my administration by passing the largest economic recovery plan in the nation's history, or to face crises in the financial market and the automobile industry. It was not ideal to take office in the midst of the worst job and growth numbers in decades -- particularly since we're still in the midst of two wars. But that's the duty I signed on for.
And although my administration did not create these problems, it's now not only my responsibility, but my extraordinary privilege, to help solve them. It's my job to address every challenge that may threaten the strength and vitality of our families, our businesses, and our entire nation -- now and in the future.
We must move quickly and aggressively on the most immediate threats to our economy and financial stability: jobs, housing, and credit. There's no debate about that. That's why we've already passed a recovery plan that will save and create 3.5 million jobs over the next two years, more than 90 percent of which will be located in the private sector -- a plan that will also give 95 percent of working families a tax cut that begins by April 1st.
That's why we've launched a housing plan that will help responsible families lower their monthly payments -- a plan that's already helping responsible homeowners save money by refinancing their loans. And that's why we've forcefully attacked the credit lockdown that the housing crisis helped create.
As all of you know, credit is the lifeblood of a healthy economy. The inability of even creditworthy businesses and consumers to get loans today is a major roadblock to our recovery.
To help get credit flowing again, we've created an unprecedented lending fund, in partnership with the Federal Reserve, that will help support up to a trillion dollars in auto loans, college loans, and loans for the consumer -- the consumers and entrepreneurs who keep this economy running. We'll soon be announcing more efforts to provide even more lending to small businesses, which are being devastated by this credit crisis.
These are all important steps. But the only way we can truly unlock credit and heal our financial system for good is to address the state of our banking system. And I know that this crisis is at the top of your list of immediate concerns -- and I promise you, it is at the top of mine, as well.
We all know how we got here. A wave of complex and risky transactions around mortgages and other loans produced huge profits for financial institutions and those who run them -- until the housing bubble burst. And now some of the nation's largest banks are holding so-called "toxic assets" -- problematic debt that are dragging down the balance sheets of these institutions with no real market in which to sell them. And this has caused a slowdown in lending. And since finance today is global, the virus has spread worldwide.
Now, it's important to note that there are thousands of banks, large and small, that have made sound decisions and are on solid footing. And all Americans need to know that their deposits are secure.
But the weakened condition of some of our largest banks has implications for the entire system, and those weaknesses must be addressed.
And critical to that solution is an honest and forthright assessment of the true status of bank balance sheets -- something that we've not yet had. And that's why the Treasury has asked bank regulators to conduct intensive examinations or "stress tests" of each bank.
When that process is complete next month, we will act decisively to ensure that our major banks have enough money on hand to lend to people even in more difficult times. And if we learn that such a bank has more serious problems, we will hold accountable those responsible, force the necessary adjustments, provide the support to clean up their balance sheets, and assure the continuity of a strong, viable institution that can serve our people and our economy.
I intend to hold these banks fully accountable for any assistance they'll receive, and this time they'll have to clearly demonstrate how taxpayer dollars result in more lending for the American taxpayer.
I also intend to enact tough, common-sense regulatory reforms, equal to the challenges of a 21st century financial system, so that a crisis like this never happens again. And when I meet with the leaders of the other G20 nations next month, I'll ask them to join us in these actions, because in an age when financial transactions often cross borders, global coordination is essential to safeguard against future crises.
But the truth is that these problems in the financial market, as acute and urgent as they are, are only part of what threatens our economy. And we must not use the need to confront them as an excuse to keep ignoring the long-term threats to our prosperity: the cost of our health care and our oil addiction; our education deficit and our fiscal deficit.
Now, I'm not choosing to address these additional challenges just because I feel like it, or because I'm a glutton for punishment. I'm doing so because they're fundamental to our economic growth, and ensuring that we don't have more crises like this in the future.
You see, we cannot go back to endless cycles of bubble and bust. We can't continue to base our economy on reckless speculation and spending beyond our means; on bad credit and inflated home prices and over-leveraged banks. This crisis teaches us that such activity is not the creation of lasting wealth -- it's the illusion of prosperity, and it hurts us all in the end.
Instead, we must build this recovery on a foundation that lasts -- on a 21st century infrastructure and a green economy with lower health care costs that create millions of new jobs and new industries; on schools that prepare our children to compete and thrive; on businesses that are free to invest in the next big idea or breakthrough discovery.
We cannot wait to build this foundation. Putting off these investments for another four years or eight years or 12 years or 20 years would be to continue the same irresponsibility that led us to this point. It would be exactly what Washington has done for decades. And it will make our recovery more fragile and our future less secure.
And that's a future I don't accept -- not for my children, and not for yours. I did not come here to pass our problems on to the next President or the next generation -- I'm here to solve them. I'm here to start building an economy and a prosperity that lasts.
Now, would I prefer to tackle these challenges without having inherited a trillion-dollar deficit or a financial crisis? Absolutely. But that's a choice that we don't have. I don't like the idea of spending more government money, nor am I interested in expanding government's role.
I've always been a strong believer in the power of the free market. It has been and will remain the very engine of America's progress -- the source of a prosperity that has gone unmatched in human history. I believe that jobs are best created not by government, but by businesses and entrepreneurs like you who are willing to take risks on a good idea. And I believe that our role as lawmakers is not to disparage wealth, but to expand its reach; not to stifle the market, but to strengthen its ability to unleash the creativity and innovation that still makes this nation the envy of the world.
But I also know this: Throughout our history, there have been times when the market has fallen out of balance. There have been moments of economic transformation and upheaval when prosperity and even basic financial security have escaped far too many of our citizens. And at these moments, government has stepped in not to supplant private enterprise, but to catalyze it -- to create the conditions for thousands of entrepreneurs and new businesses to adapt and ultimately to thrive.
That's why we laid down railroads and highways to spur commerce and industry -- to stitch this nation together. That's why, even in the midst of civil war, Lincoln launched a transcontinental railroad, and Land Grant colleges and the National Academy of Sciences. That's why we initiated universal public high schools and passed a GI bill to nurture the skills and talents of all our workers. That's why Eisenhower built an interstate highway system, and Kennedy pointed us to the moon, knowing that the exploration would lead to unimagined innovations here on Earth.
That's what we've done in the past. And that's why I've chosen to address education, health care, energy and this budget -- because we can't wait to make the investments today that will lead to tomorrow's prosperity.
As members of the Business Roundtable, you know how important this is when it comes to each one of these challenges.
On education -- I know that you just heard from Arne Duncan. You've all long understood that the success of your business ultimately depends on its ability to hire workers who have the skills and knowledge to compete with other workers and other companies all over the world. You also know that America is increasingly falling behind in that competition.
That's why it will be the goal of this administration to ensure that every child has access to a complete and competitive education -- from the day they are born to the day they begin their career.
We've already dramatically expanded early childhood education, and we will continue to improve the quality of these programs. For as this organization knows, children who receive a quality early childhood education are more likely to attend college, more likely to hold a job, and more likely to earn more in that job.
This budget also creates new rewards tied to teacher performance and pathways for advancement and rewards for success for those teachers. And we're going to invest in innovative programs that are already helping schools meet high standards and close achievement gaps. We've urged states to lift the cap on the number of charter schools they build. And I've asked every American to commit to at least one year or more of higher education or career training, with the goal of having the highest proportion of college graduates in the world by the year 2020.
And to meet that goal, we're investing $2.5 million to identify and support initiatives across the country that achieve results in helping students graduate. And we'll also make sure that a higher education is affordable for every American who wants to go.
This budget also recognizes a reality that you understand as business leaders: In this economy, adults of all ages need opportunities to earn new degrees and skills. So we will work with our universities and community colleges to prepare workers for good jobs in high-growth industries, and to improve access to job training not only for young people who are just starting their careers, but also for older workers who need new skills to change careers. That's how we'll create a workforce that will help our businesses compete and win in the 21st century. And that's how we'll create a workforce that is adaptable to a dynamic, global, capitalist system.
Even as we invest in our workers, we'll also need to create the jobs for them to fill. And that's why the second major investment that our budget makes is in the jobs and industries of the future.
The recovery plan we passed will ultimately leverage at least $175 billion in private sector investment -- investment in areas like clean energy and small business development and school construction.
This budget builds on that foundation by making historic investments in science and technology and infrastructure; by making permanent the Research and Experimentation Credit; by eliminating capital gains taxes for investments in small business and start-ups; and by providing the resources necessary to finally spark a clean energy revolution.
We all know that the country that harnesses the power of renewable energy will lead the 21st century. And yet, it's China that's launched the largest effort in history to make their economy energy efficient. We invented solar technology, but we've fallen behind countries like Germany and Japan in producing it. New plug-in hybrids will roll off our assembly lines, but they're running on battery cells made in Korea.
I do not accept a future where the jobs and industries of tomorrow take root beyond our borders -- and I know you don't either. It's time for America to lead. And to do this, you and I both know that we need ultimately to make clean, renewable energy the profitable kind of energy. We know that the best way to do that is through market-based caps on carbon pollution that drives the production of more renewable energy in America.
I understand that this will be a difficult transition for many businesses to make, and that's why this budget does not account for such a cap until 2012 -- a time when this economy should be on the road to recovery. And to support this transition, we'll invest $15 billion a year to develop technologies like wind power and solar power, advanced biofuels, clean coal, and more fuel-efficient cars and trucks built right here in America.
The last major challenge we address in this budget is a threat not only to the well-being of our families and the prosperity of our businesses, but to the very foundation of our economy -- and that's the exploding cost of health care in America. And I know you had a session with Peter Orszag about this.
For those who believe that this issue is somehow unrelated to our economic crisis, consider the fact that up to 1.5 million Americans could lose their homes this year -- just because of medical crises. And as everybody in this room is painfully aware, the same soaring costs that are straining our families' budgets are also sinking some of our best businesses or putting enormous strain on your bottom line.
Today, too many small businesses can't even think about insuring their employees. And major American corporations like yours are struggling to compete with foreign counterparts. Companies of all sizes are being forced to ship jobs overseas or shut their doors for good.
Medicare costs are consuming our federal budget. Medicaid is overwhelming our state budgets. At the fiscal summit we held in the White House a few weeks ago, the one thing on which everyone agreed was that the greatest threat to America's fiscal health is not the investments we've made to rescue our economy -- it's the skyrocketing cost of our health care system.
You understand this. For years, the Business Roundtable has worked tirelessly to promote investments in electronic medical records, with strict privacy standards, that will help save money and lives -- investments that we have now made in the recovery plan. You participated in last week's White House Forum on Health Reform, proving that this time, we find business and labor, medical professionals and patient advocates, all on the side -- same side of the issue, urging meaningful reform. And you were one of the many organizations that urged us to include health care in this budget -- which is why we've made a historic commitment to reform based on the principle that we must bring down crushing costs and provide quality, affordable health care to every American. It's a commitment that's paid for in part by efficiencies in the system that are long overdue, and we will need your help to ensure that it is included in the final budget.
Let me just give you one example: Medicare. For years we've been paying Medicare Advantage plans 14 percent more than it would cost for the traditional Medicare plan. In this budget, we have a simple idea: Instead of government setting prices for our seniors, why not have private plans bid for Medicare's business? This competitive bidding is good for businesses, it's good for our seniors, and it's good for taxpayers, because it saves us $177 billion over 10 years.
We've undertaken an unprecedented effort to find savings just like this in every corner of this budget, because with the deficit we inherited, the cost of the recession we face, and the long-term challenges we have to meet, it's never been more important to ensure that as our economy recovers, we do what it takes to cut this deficit in half by the end of my first term in office.
Now, I know that some have questioned this commitment, and I want you to know that I understand the skepticism, because we've heard promises like this before. And it's true that this crisis has compelled us to add to our deficit in the short term. But I ask all of you to look at this budget. Already, we've identified $2 trillion in deficit reductions over the next decade. We've announced procurement reform that will save the government $40 billion by greatly reducing no-bid contracts. We're going to end education programs that don't work. We will eliminate direct payments to agribusiness that don't need them. We'll root out even more waste, fraud, and abuse in our Medicare program.
So, altogether, this budget cuts spending by $1 trillion over the next decade -- $1 trillion from where it would be if we just kept on going on our current path. And that will reduce discretionary spending for domestic programs as a share of the economy by more than 10 percent over the next decade. It will be at the lowest level in nearly half a century -- lowest level in nearly half a century.
Now, if we wanted to, we could have painted a sunnier fiscal picture in this budget. We could have relied on some of the same gimmicks that our government has used for the last eight years -- gimmicks that would hide spending on things like Iraq and Afghanistan -- gimmicks like assuming that there's never a natural disaster anywhere in the country over the course of a year. Our deficit would appear $2.7 trillion better -- had we used those gimmicks -- over the next decade.
But I told my team we're not going to do that. We're not just suffering from a deficit of dollars in this government -- we're suffering from a deficit of trust. And I believe that restoring that trust begins by restoring a sense of honesty and accountability to our budget.
Now, while we're being honest, let's also talk about taxes, always a favorite subject. I said in my address to Congress that this is the one issue that always falls victim to the same political scare tactics we've seen for decades. So let me be very clear: If this budget is passed, not one American will see their taxes raised a single dime between now and the end of 2010. All right, so for the next two years, your taxes aren't going up -- nobody. At that point, at the end of 2010, 97 percent of all taxpayers and 97 percent of all small businesses will still not see a tax increase -- 97 percent. In fact, 95 percent of all working families will receive a tax cut, so they can buy some of the wonderful products that you make.
For the top 3 percent of all taxpayers -- and I'm just going to take a shot in the dark and guess that that includes some of the people in this room -- the top tax rate across the board will still be lower than they were during the prosperity of the 1990s. It will still be lower than they were during the Clinton era. You will pay a tax rate on capital gains and dividends that is also lower than it was during most of the 1990s. And the revenue that results from these changes will reduce the deficit by $750 billion over the next 10 years.
Now, there's no doubt that we've had to make some tough choices in this budget, and we're likely to have to make more in the days and months ahead. And you and I won't always agree on every decision or every issue, but I do believe that we know what needs to be done to build an economy that's not just revived from a crisis, but rebuilt for the future -- to secure a prosperity that no longer rests on a bubble, but on a firm foundation that will make this country strong and competitive in the 21st century.
That kind of economy -- an economy with workers who are highly skilled and highly educated; with a health care system that is efficient and affordable; with energy that is clean and renewable; with entrepreneurs who are free to invest in the next big idea -- that's an economy that's built to last. That's a future that's good for business. And this is a country that will lead and prosper for generations to come.
And I look forward to your continued cooperation in building that country, because I have absolute faith that we can get there together. So thank you very much. {APPLAUSE}
I asked -- I asked my team for some extra time to make sure that I was able to answer as many questions as possible.
Mr. Chairman of the roundtable, do you want to start us off?
{OTHER-SPEAK} I do, thank you very much. And, Mr. President, we really appreciate you taking time to be with us and to give us access to so much of your team throughout the day.
The business community is committed to be a part of the solution. And those millions of jobs that you talked about, you know, largely, as you say, are coming from businesses. And therefore, we want to partner with you in terms of, one, ending this economic crisis, increasing liquidity and getting smart regulation. We're with you and Secretary Duncan on the education agenda, workforce development, personal training, vocational training. We're for affordable and quality health care costs, and access to that for everyone.
We certainly want to be able to create that energy independence that you talked about. And we want to be in a position where we can have the kind of investment in our community by keeping our markets open and having access to markets all around.
So we're committed to being able to do all that and working with you.
During the campaign you talked often about having an open administration -- and you were going to push very, very hard for that. There's a misperception I think in some people's minds that the relationship between business and the Obama administration is like, well, oil and vinegar in that way. Well, I would like to tell you that, from our standpoint, that couldn't be farther from the truth. Everybody in this room is anxious to see you succeed and wants to be a part of that.
In that end, you know, we have the same common goals right now -- jobs, growth, recovery, competitiveness -- and as such, the ask that I would have for you is that if you would allow us to set up a regular schedule, such that the expertise of the chief executives here could work with whoever you designate to be a sounding board, pushing back and helping to form those kinds of opinions.
And thank you again for coming. {/OTHER-SPEAK} 
Absolutely. That's exactly the kind of partnership that we seek. As I said, there are actually a lot of people in this room who our team has consulted with on a regular basis, and we hope to do more of that in the future.
And I know that, you know, John has attended a number of the summits that we've been putting in place. I think you will find that this is actually an administration that also wants you to succeed in the same way that you want us to succeed. As I said before, I am a strong believer in the ability of the free market to generate wealth and prosperity that's shared across the board. I think there are times where sometimes our economy gets out of balance. This is obviously one of those times. And so government has to intervene in a crisis. But the goals should always be to right the ship and let private enterprise do its magic.
There are going to be a series of fairly complex issues around regulation in the financial markets, which we believe is necessary. I think we've got to -- and I assume that many of the people here agree that we've got to update the regulatory framework that was created in the '30s for global markets where trillions of dollars are spinning around the globe with the press of a button. But we are also very mindful that we've got to do those regulatory reforms in a way that doesn't strangle innovation and creativity and entrepreneurship, but deals with the systemic risks that obviously we were unprepared to deal with when this latest crisis occurred.
With respect to a tax policy, again, we want to consult with you, because our belief is that we've got to have a stable system that closes the structural deficit that right now is built into the federal government. And it's an unsustainable deficit. If we keep on going down this path, at some point folks who've been financing our ways are going to say, enough; we don't want to buy anymore T-bills. And then we've got some problems.
So we're going to work with you on that. We want to do it in a way that encourages work, encourages investment, encourages savings, and make sure that we're financing what we need out of government, but no more than what we need.
So, on a whole host of these issues, we are going to be actively soliciting your advice and your input, and our expectation is that we can use this moment to create a stronger free market system, one that's more stable, one that's more profitable over the long term. But I think as everybody here recognizes because you're all thinking about it with respect to your own businesses, this is going to take some time. I mean, we were engaging in a unsustainable model for a very long time, and the bill is now due for a lot of bad habits and bad practices that were built up over the course of many years.
It is complicated, and it is international. And so our focus right now is to stabilize the financial system, get credit flowing again, to project a budget that allows in future years for us to start tackling these very big problems. But we've got to get started now if we're actually going to get there -- on health care, on energy, and education. And that's what we're trying to accomplish.
Let's see -- Sam.
{OTHER-SPEAK} Thank you, Mr. President. Well, first of all, we're very encouraged -- {/OTHER-SPEAK} 
{OTHER-SPEAK} Here, we got a mic right behind you.
On behalf of everyone in the business community, we're very, very encouraged with your words and your support. You've always said that you were committed to the competitiveness of American business. You've always said you're committed to the competitiveness of our country. And we really appreciate it. We are in tough times.
I also want to thank you for all the support in the stimulus package. And when we met, you listened to us and you implemented many of our ideas and your leadership made a difference. So, again, we appreciate it. {/OTHER-SPEAK} 
Thank you. 

{/speech}
