{title} Remarks by the President, the Vice President and Senator Clinton at Tribute to Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton {/title}
{event} Tribute to Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, Madison Square Garden, New York, New York {/event}
{speaker} Hillary Rodham Clinton {/speaker}
{date} January 7, 2001 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech}

Thank you, thank you, thank you. {APPLAUSE} Thank you so very much. I am so gratified and so honored to be here with all of you and, once again, to take the oath, administered by the Vice President, that will give me the privilege of serving you.

I'm so pleased that so many people can be here. And in addition to everyone who has spoken and everyone whom Judith has introduced, I would also like to acknowledge that included in the audience, our Speaker, Peter Vallone; and public advocate, Mark Green; and controller, Alan Hevesi; and Bronx Borough President, Freddy Ferrer; C. Virginia Fields, the President of the Borough of Manhattan. {APPLAUSE}

And two men who gave me so much support, good advice, made me laugh and were there with me every step of the way, my mayors, Ed Koch and David Dinkins. {APPLAUSE}

It is such a great pleasure to be here with Judith Hope, who has done a superb job on behalf of our party throughout New York. {APPLAUSE} And particularly in making it clear that there was an active, dynamic, Democratic Party in upstate New York and bringing people together who had never been brought into the political process, on behalf of the Democratic Party or Democratic candidates before. I think it's important that we continue that work, and I know that Chuck and Judith and every one of us will continue to work to make sure that upstate Democrats have a place at the table, and are included, as we keep building a strong Democratic Party for the future. And I thank all of you for your help and for being here with me today. {APPLAUSE}

I want to thank again, not only Charlie Rangel, but the other Democratic members of the congressional delegation, some of whom could be with us today. I'm so grateful to all of you for your help. And I look forward, Charlie, to working with you and the entire delegation, as we really put the priorities of New York on the front of the congressional agenda. I think that there's an opportunity for us if we are united and focused to make real progress in the Congress. And I look to all of you to be good partners with Chuck and me.

I cannot think of a better partner to have than Chuck Schumer. I remember campaigning for Chuck in 1998 and knowing, because of his energy and determination, that he would not only win, but that he would be such a successful senator. And after he was elected, he'd occasionally call me from other places in the state and talk about what was going on. And his excitement was still as great as it had ever been, and is continuing today. He is so well respected in the Senate, and I am just so looking forward to working with my senior senator, on behalf of all of you, in the United States Senate. {APPLAUSE}

And again, I want to thank Al and Tipper Gore for being here. {APPLAUSE} And I have to say that it's been such a great pleasure for me to get to know Al and Tipper. I remember when we first met, when Bill asked Al to join the ticket. I remember the convention of 1992, right here. I remember getting on that bus and starting our journey to the White House together. And along the way, over the last eight years, I have just grown in appreciation for both Al and Tipper, and their commitment to public service and their commitment to our country.

I believe that this election of 2000 is not only one that we have to learn lessons from, but that we can never let anything like it ever happen again. {APPLAUSE} I know that there are a lot of members of churches that I attended and visited during the past 16 months, and actually going back eight or nine years. And I know how often in a church or in a union hall or in an athletic field or anywhere that I appeared, I would urge people to be sure to vote. Because I believed, with all my heart, that the real secret of our democracy is not our leadership, but our citizenship. And that our most fundamental obligation as a citizen is to vote.

And when I think of all of those people in Florida, who went to the trouble and took the time because they believed they were exercising their citizenship responsibility to vote, and that their votes were not counted, it only deepens my commitment to ensuring that our democracy will remain strong and we will do whatever is necessary to reform our election system, so that every person's vote will always be counted, at every election from now into the future. {APPLAUSE}

I want to thank all of the entertainers and the artists who are with us, people whom I admire and have such great feeling for. I want to thank, again, the Friendship Baptist Church Choir, from Buffalo. {APPLAUSE} I want to tell them I'm glad they made the journey down to be with us. I want to thank the magnificent Jessye Norman; the Nobel prize winner, Toni Morrison; and the incomparable, Billy Joel, for everything they added to this event today. {APPLAUSE}

And I particularly want to thank my husband, and my daughter and my family.

You know, when I began my listening tour, and I started traveling all over the state, and I spent the night in people's homes, and I had breakfasts, lunches and dinners with you, and I went into supermarket aisles and stood and talked with people, and I went to factory floors, and I visited every kind of setting you can imagine, I thought about how different it was to listen to the problems and challenges facing New Yorkers in 1999 and 2000 than it had been in 1991 and 1992.

I remember very well what our country was like, and what was happening because of the failure of leadership at our national level, right here in New York. And I am so proud of the leadership that the President has brought to New York and America and the world, because we are a better nation today then we were in 1992. {APPLAUSE} And I could never have made this race and waged this campaign without the support of both Bill and Chelsea.

But now we have to ask ourselves, where do we go from here? You know, when the curtain comes down here, and Chuck and I and Charlie and the other members of the delegation return to Washington and begin the work of the Senate and the House, we know that we've got some big questions to answer. We've got some real hard issues to confront.

I'm looking forward to working with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle. I'm looking forward to working with the new administration, whenever and wherever that's possible. But my first and primary obligation is to you, is to serve the people of this city and state, and to make sure that New York's interests and needs are never forgotten -- {APPLAUSE} -- to be there constantly as a voice and a vote, pointing out that this state, which has given so much to this country, deserves to have its fair share, deserves to be taken seriously, deserves to have the kind of economic, educational, health care, environmental and other policies that the people of New York are demanding.

So when I go back to the Senate, and start the work of the 107th Congress, I'm going to take with me all of the stories and memories, the faces of everyone I've met: from the little girl in Buffalo who asked me to please be sure that we could remain safe, and that the crime rate would keep going down, and that people who shouldn't have them, wouldn't have access to guns -- {APPLAUSE} -- to the factory workers in Binghamton, who wanted to be sure that the economy kept growing, and that jobs kept being produced and that we were on the cutting edge of technology throughout New York, and who understand that if our economy is not strong and well-led from the top, it will have an impact on our bottom line and our futures here in New York.

And I remember all of the farmers that I met, from the tip of Long Island to Jamestown. And I respect so deeply the work they do, because it's not only the work of producing food, it's the work of maintaining a way of life that generations of New Yorkers have enjoyed and cherished. And as I walked the streets of Brooklyn or the Bronx or Queens, as I visited with transit workers on Staten Island, as I went from one end of Manhattan to the other, I could see the hope and the dreams and the aspirations of people of all ages.

But none of this will be possible if we don't continue to build on the policies that have worked for America. I want to be sure that the prosperity, the progress and the peace that we've enjoyed the last eight years, under the leadership of the President and the Vice President, continues. And I will be a strong voice and a strong vote, along with Chuck Schumer, to make sure we do everything possible to make that happen.

You know, when we got on the bus and we headed out, our first stop was in Camden, New Jersey. And there was a big banner that had been put up that was a scriptural quote that Bill had used throughout the campaign, from Isaiah: "Where there is no vision, the people perish."

Well, for eight years, we've had a vision. We've had a vision of inclusion that brings people together, regardless of race or gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, disability or any other reason for divisiveness. {APPLAUSE} We've had a vision of expanding economic opportunity that made it clear we were going to pay down our debt and close our deficit and spur investment and keep us on a steady course. We had a vision of educational attainment for every child, no matter where that child is or who that child's parents are. And I will not rest until we can look any child in this state in the eye and say, we are giving you equality of educational opportunity -- now it is up to you to do the rest with your teachers and your parents and your community. {APPLAUSE}

We cannot say that yet today. You know as well as I do that I've been in schools where children don't have access to libraries, where they're crowded into the classrooms, where the building is falling down around them, where the number of computers is so few that they get on it maybe once every two weeks. We can do better than that. And I have a vision of making sure we provide quality, affordable health care to every New Yorker and every American, regardless of age, regardless of geography, regardless of any other condition. {APPLAUSE}

And as someone who has traveled this state in places where my friends who were privileged to be born and grow up here have not yet seen, let me just tell you, this is the most beautiful state in the entire country. We have everything. {APPLAUSE} And it is up to us to be good stewards of that beautiful environment, to make sure that the water we drink and the air we breathe and the ground we build on and that our children play on is safe. And I am committed in every way that I can, to build on the legacy of progress that not only this administration leaves behind, but those who have filled this seat before me have helped to shape.

I am very grateful to Senator Moynihan for his leadership, his guidance and his vision of the kind of government and people we could be. {APPLAUSE}

And, finally, let me say that I believe that politics and government are a team sport. No one gets to any position in any organization alone. Everyone stands on the shoulders of others. Everyone is held up by countless hands. And I, among all of you, know so well, I would not be here were it not for each and every one of you. Everyone who hosted a house party, everyone who passed out literature, everyone who sent a letter, everyone who made a telephone call, everyone who contributed, everyone who worked a poll, every single one of you.

And every day that I get up and go to work in the Senate, or travel throughout our state, meeting with you, I will never forget the honor you have given me. And I hope that, together, we will demonstrate what is possible when there is a vision and people work side by side in order to realize it.

Thank you all so much for this honor and God bless you, God bless New York and God bless America. {APPLAUSE}

{/speech}
