{title} Remarks of the Presidentand the First Lady in Highlighting Charter Of Freedoms Project {/title}
{event} Highlighting Charter Of Freedoms Project {/event}
{speaker} Hillary Rodham Clinton {/speaker}
{date} July 1, 1999 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. And I especially want to thank all of the students who are here with us today, especially Jasmine, Kevin and Nora, for reading to us the words that launched our nation and have inspired and challenged us ever since.

Imagine how significant those phrases are, "We the people," "Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness," "Congress shall make no law." There is so much about these Charters of Freedom that we learned about as children and that we still, every day, attempt to live up to in our country.

And I want to thank all of you who are gathered here for this important announcement. I want to thank Secretary and Mrs. Riley, who have joined us; a number of other officials from the administration; Congressman Regula, who is here with us; the Center for Civic Education; and all of you, the students, the educators and the citizens who are helping to pass on the Charters of Freedom and the values they teach to every generation.

I'm especially pleased to be here with Michael Armstrong and AT&T for your extraordinary generosity. For generations, AT&T connected us as individuals, and now it is helping to connect us to the past and move us forward into the future by helping to save our founding documents and make them come alive for our children.

I cannot think of a better gift than the gift that AT&T is announcing today to the Archives, the gift that they've given to the Save America's Treasures initiative that is part of the White House Millennium Council, that truly is making it possible for us to give gifts to the future that will carry us into the next century and the next millennium. So, on behalf of the White House Millennium Council, on behalf of all of us who care about preserving and enhancing our past, let me again thank Michael Armstrong and AT&T for this generous, generous gift. {APPLAUSE}

And none of what we are celebrating today would have been possible without the early support of the Pew Charitable Trust, which allowed the National Archives, the Department of Commerce and NASA to create new cases for the charters. And none of that would have been possible without the commitment and leadership of John Carlin and the entire staff of the National Archives.

John and I first spoke about this project two years ago this month. And he has been a tireless advocate for the need to enhance and preserve better the work that is maintained here in the Archives -- the safety deposit box, which Mr. Armstrong referred to. So I want to thank John, the staff of the Archives and everyone who has helped us understand how we could preserve and protect the charters.

Imagine, if you will, the long tradition of citizens who have made it possible for us to meet here on the brink of a new century and a new millennium -- citizens who in the past protected our charter. Imagine Stephen Pleasanton, a State Department clerk in 1814, who received word that the British forces were coming and that the should take care of the papers in his office.

Now, when he asked the Secretary of War, the Secretary told him he shouldn't be so worried because it was unlikely that the British would break through the line. But as I have often told the story in the White House, we know, indeed, that the British did, and burned the White House to the ground.

And, thankfully, Mr. Pleasanton did not listen to those optimistic reports. Instead, he and others gathered up the Declaration of Independence, laws, letter from George Washington and the unpublished journals of Congress, and brought them to a grist mill two miles from Georgetown. But he decided that that was not far enough away from danger, so he found wagons and took the documents another 35 miles, to Leesburg. He made sure they were safe in an empty house. He locked the doors and he went to bed, exhausted.

When he woke up, he did hear the news that Washington had been set on fire the night before, our public buildings had been burned to the ground. But, thankfully, our founding documents were unharmed because he had saved them.

Well, he was the first in a long line of concerned Americans. And now it is our turn. Because of today's announcement we can help ensure that the Charters of Freedom will be saved for all time and accessible to all people. We can help ensure that 100 years from now children will be able to visit this sacred place and to hear and see the words and the work of our Founding Fathers and so many others who have made America what it is today.

Imagine seeing the notes that President Eisenhower wrote to memorialize what he did during the Little Rock crisis; or to look over the papers showing the arrest and conviction of Susan B. Anthony because she had the audacity to vote. Our children will see this and so much more that is part of the American legacy.

And that is exactly what the President and I had in mind two years ago when we came here in August to announce the White House Millennium Council. We wanted to mark this important point in history, and to provide an opportunity for Americans to take stock of who we are as we end the 20th century, and to decide what of our culture, our history and our values we will bring with us into the next century.

We chose a theme for these activities: Honor the past; imagine the future. And that is what we've been trying to do. We've used the White House, our oldest continuous venue for presenting the arts in America, to showcase the best or our creativity and scholarship. In seven Millennium Evenings that we have held since 1998, we've heard about the future of science from Stephen Hawking; we've heard Winton Marsalis and Marian McPartland explore jazz as an expression of our democracy; we've heard Nobel Prize winner Elie Wiesel talk about the perils of indifference from Nazi Germany to the Balkans.

Two years ago, we invited Americans to think about ways each of us could give gifts to the future. Today there are more than 135 Millennium Communities. We're also seeing citizens coming together to build new parks, plants trees, create Millennium Trails, all of which help to explore our history and help us appreciate our beautiful outdoors. Because, after all, it is not just our Charters of Freedoms that help us define who we are as Americans; there are many artifacts and documents all over our country.

So we've tried, through the Save America's Treasures campaign to help preserve that history. It is a public-private partnership designed to highlight what is special about America's past. And this year the President proposed grants to save some of our most endangered sites and collections. And I'm very pleased that the Congress, with the leadership of Congressman Regula, and with bipartisan support, approved $30 million for this important effort.

And I'm very pleased that our partner, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, represented here by Dick Moe, has helped to raise an additional $33 million in private funding.

So we can see all over the country that saving treasures is not just the work of the federal government, nor even of our major corporate citizens, like AT&T, or even of our philanthropic foundations like Pew, but indeed, it is the work of all of us, from the youngest of our citizens to the oldest.

When I was recently at the ancient cliff dwellings at Mesa Verde, I learned about a 3rd grade class in Boulder, Colorado, that did extra chores to create something that they called "Adopt a Ruin" calendars. And by selling these calendars, they raised $15. One girl wrote to us and said, "I've raised $15 so far. I feel very special about that because it will mean that my kids get the experience to see all of these wonderful, important sites." Well, that is one of the reasons why this particular announcement is so important.

I'm reminded about the students from Woodlawn High School in Arlington, who are making the lessons about our democracy come alive. They're having town meetings where they give everyone something to say, and those town meetings are exploring all kinds of issues -- from the number of teachers they should hire to whether they have compulsory study halls -- which, incidentally, the lobbied to overturn. They've interviewed veterans of World War II to ask them about the rights they were fighting for. They've done so much, including studying the Bill of Rights and learning more about what it means to be an American citizen.

So as we are now quickly approaching another 4th of July, I hope we will continue to think about how we pass on the values and the blessings that we enjoy as Americans, and that always we will pay particular attention to preserving that of our past that tells us who we are today and where we're going tomorrow.

Passing on the gift of freedom and the opportunity that comes with being an American may be our most important obligation. And by doing so, we help create the kind of future that we want for these young people and for all American children.

It's been a great pleasure working these last two years on the enterprises of the White House Millennium Council. And we have another year and some months to go in order to continue to spread the word about what we are trying to accomplish. And it's been a particular delight that the President has been so involved in these efforts. He's a great history buff and has contributed greatly to the ideas that we have developed about honoring the millennium.

So it gives me great pleasure to introduce the President of the United States. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
