{title} speech about Iraq {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} John Kerry {/speaker}
{date} September 8, 2004 {/date}
{source} http://transcripts.cnn.com/ {/source}
{description} John Kerry addressing a crowd in Cincinnati, Ohio, making the case that he believes that President Bush made the wrong decision to go to war, being critical of that decision, saying now it is time to lead America in a new direction, not only being critical of the decision, but Senator Kerry saying things like, it's not one thing he would have done differently in dealing with Iraq, it is everything he would have done differently. {/description}


{speech} 

Thank you so much. Thank you for a wonderful Cincinnati, wonderful Ohio warm and generous welcome. I appreciate it enormously. And, like you, I'm so respectful and so in awe of the courage and the patriotism of Robin O'Brien.

Will you all join me with Robin O'Brien -- will you all join me in saying thank you to Robin O'Brien, for her wonderful... {APPLAUSE}

Thank you. Thank you.

{AUDIENCE} Kerry! Kerry! Kerry! {/AUDIENCE} 

Ladies and gentlemen, please. Ladies. Please, everybody. Thank you. Thank you very, very much.

One of the things that Gil and all of our troops are fighting for as they fight in Iraq is freedom. And I have nothing but the greatest respect for people's right to have their opinions and to express them here in the United States of America. {APPLAUSE}

That's who we are as Americans. 

And I might add, it's a terrific tactic of the Bush team: They love to disrupt, they love to interrupt, they don't want America to hear the truth. But we will talk the truth. {APPLAUSE}

I think that more than anything -- I really believe this very deeply, I honestly respect the differences of opinion and the emotions that people feel. We all respect them. 

You know, I once stood up and spoke about what I thought our government was doing that was wrong, and so many of our generation believed deeply in that right. 

But I think what we need more than anything today in this great country of ours is a conversation, a talk, Americans to Americans, not about how we divide each other. 

And we need leadership that doesn't look for the lowest common denominator of America, but the highest common denominator. Bring us together, bring us together. {APPLAUSE}

And these are troubling times. They are times of emotion. They tug at the emotions of all Americans. 

What we need to do is lower our voices and listen to each other about the real choices that we face as a nation. 

Yesterday, in Iraq, we marked the most incalculable loss of all. Yesterday, we reached a tragic milestone: More than 1,000 of America's sons and daughters gave their lives in service to our country; more than 1,000 sons and daughters, husbands and wives, brothers and sisters, who will never come home to live the lives that they dreamed of. 

We honor them. We pray for them. We pray for their families. 

And we owe it to their memory and to all of our troops to do what's right in Iraq and what's right here at home. {APPLAUSE}

I also want to speak directly to the more than 150,000 troops who are currently serving and risking their lives as far away as in Iraq or Afghanistan, and to the sons and daughters like Gil O'Brien, that Robin just talked about, who have served once, who are here now but who are going to go back. 

Your country is proud of you. You are the most dedicated, capable military that we've ever had in our history. We are united as a nation in support for you. We pledge to stand with you and with your families, as you are standing on the front lines for ours. 

You're the best of America and you perform magnificently every single day. We thank you for your service and for your sacrifice. {APPLAUSE}

Twenty-three months ago, President Bush came right here to this great civic and educational institution in this great city, to ask the American people for our support. And he promised then to make the right choices when it came to sending young Americans to Iraq. 

Here in Cincinnati, he said that if Congress approved the resolution giving him the authority to use force, it did not mean that military action would be unavoidable. But he chose not to give the weapons inspectors the time they needed, not just to get the job done, but to give meaning to the words "going to war as a last resort." {APPLAUSE}

Here in Cincinnati, he promised to lead a coalition, but he failed to build the kind of broad, strong, real coalition, and he rushed to war without a plan to win the peace. {APPLAUSE}

Here in Cincinnati, from this hall, on that night, he spoke to the nation and he promised, quote, "If we have to act, we will take every precaution that is possible, we will plan carefully, we will act with the full power of the United States military, we will act with allies at our side, and we will prevail." 

But then George W. Bush made the wrong choices. 

He himself now admits he miscalculated in Iraq. But in truth, his miscalculation was ignoring the advice that he was given, including the very best advice of America's own military. {APPLAUSE}

When he didn't like what he was hearing, he even fired the Army chief of staff. 

His miscalculation was going to war without taking every precaution, without giving the inspectors time. His miscalculation was going to war without planning carefully and without the allies that we should have had at our side. 

As a result, America has paid nearly 90 percent of the bill in Iraq. Contrast that with the Gulf War, where our allies paid 95 percent of the costs. 

George W. Bush's wrong choices have led America in the wrong direction in Iraq and they have left America without the resources that we need so desperately here at home. {APPLAUSE}

The cost of the president's go-it-alone policy in Iraq is now $200 billion and counting. $200 billion for Iraq, but they tell us we can't afford after-school programs for our children. $200 billion for Iraq, but they tell us we can't afford health care for our veterans. $200 billion dollars for Iraq, but they tell us we can't afford to keep the 100,000 police officers we put on the streets during the 1990s.

We're here today to tell them they're wrong. 

It's time to lead America in a new direction. {APPLAUSE}

When it comes to Iraq, it's not that I would have done one thing differently from the president; I would have done almost everything differently from the president. {APPLAUSE}

I would have given the inspectors the time they needed before rushing to war. I would have built a genuine coalition of allies and made sure that every soldier that was put in harm's way actually had the equipment and the body armor that they needed. 

I would have listened to our senior military leaders in this country, and I would have listened to the bipartisan advice that was given by the Congress of the United States. 

And if there's one thing that I learned from my own experience in a war, I would never have gone to war without a plan to win the peace. {APPLAUSE}

I would not have made the wrong choices that are now forcing us to pay nearly the entire cost of this war: $200 billion that we're not investing in education and health care, job creation here at home; $200 billion for going it alone in Iraq. 

That's the wrong choice. That's the wrong direction. And that's the wrong leadership for America. {APPLAUSE} And while we're spending that $200 billion in Iraq -- that's to this date; it will go on -- 8 million Americans are looking for work here in America: 2 million more -- 2 million more than when George W. Bush took office. And we're told that we can't afford to invest in job creation and job training here at home. 

But for the Bush administration, helping Americans find a good job has never been the top priority. The first time that we really heard anything much about jobs has been in the last few months of this campaign. And I suggest to you that once every few months just before an election is not enough. 

At that convention in New York last week, they actually told us that out-sourcing jobs was good for America. Now, that should not come as a surprise to you, because that's exactly what they've been doing for the last four years and that's exactly what they intend to do for the next four years. 

That's the wrong choice. That's the wrong direction for America. That's the wrong leadership for America. {APPLAUSE}

As president, I intend to set a new direction. And it's one that's based on just fundamental, good old, mainstream American values and common sense. Here's common sense: I will close the tax loopholes that actually ask you, with your tax money, to reward companies that ship the jobs overseas and, instead... {APPLAUSE}

And instead, we're going to do something else that leaps out at you in its common sense. We're going to take that money from the money that's encouraging people to go overseas and we're going to reward the companies that create and keep the good jobs right here in the United States of America. {APPLAUSE}

Because of this president's wrong choices we're spending $200 billion in Iraq, while the costs of health care are going through the roof. And we're told we don't have the resources to make health care affordable and available to all Americans, we don't have the resources to reimburse Medicare enough, we can't help the hospitals hire more nurses, we can't help people be able to afford to get it. 

Americans now 45 million strong have no health insurance at all: 5 million more than the day George W. Bush took office. 

And after four years of action, four years of nothing, four years of no action, four years of no concern, four years of no meetings at which they really pulled people together and say, "How do we solve this problem together as Americans?" four years of no mention of those who are struggling to afford health care, suddenly the president finally told us last week that he actually had a plan. Well, if you were wondering what it was, you only had to wait 24 hours to find out, because the very next day he raised the Medicare premiums by 17 percent; the biggest increase in Medicare in the history of our country. {APPLAUSE}

And here's the kicker: A lot of that money is nothing more than a windfall transferred payment from your pockets right into the health care companies and the HMOs. They're charging 17 percent more for Medicare while making America pay $200 billion for a go-it-alone policy in Iraq. 

That's the wrong choice. That's the wrong direction. That's the wrong leadership for America. {APPLAUSE} 

As president, I will set a new direction. George W. Bush believes that when it comes to health care the big drug companies come first, the insurance companies come second and you come last. Well, I'm going to put you first. {APPLAUSE}

Our plan is a real plan. I invite anybody listening, go to Johnkerry.com. It includes all the ways we're going to deal with children, with seniors, with health care. And it actually -- contrary to what the president who, once again, is misleading America, running around the country talking about tort reform -- it also includes a provision of medical malpractice and tort reform. So we will take on the waste and the greed in the health care system. 

And you know what? We're going to save the average family up to $1,000 a year on their premiums. Our plan is going to help... {APPLAUSE}

And we don't just focus on the people who don't have the health insurance. We focus on the people who have it and lower their costs. And we focus on American business. 

And we do it in a market way, in a responsible way. We invite business to be part of the solution. There's no mandate. There's no government program. There's no new bureaucracy. And we let Americans do what Americans want to do, which is choose their own doctor, choose their own plan, and have choices as to where to go, what to do. {APPLAUSE}

And one of the things I'm proudest of, our plan automatically, immediately will cover all children in America, day one. You go to school, you're covered. You go to day care, you're covered. You go to child care, you're covered. {APPLAUSE} I'll tell you, I am determined that when I am president, America will stop being the only industrial nation on this planet that doesn't yet accept that health care is not a privilege for the elected or the selected or the wealthy or the connected. 

Health care is a right for all Americans, and we're going to make it available to all Americans. {APPLAUSE}

Because of George W. Bush's wrong choices, we're spending $200 billion in Iraq while we're running up the biggest deficits in American history, the biggest deficits announced yesterday and the biggest debt. 

We've added more debt under George Bush, more debt to the national debt of our nation, than we added from George Washington to Ronald Reagan. And that threatens Social Security, and that's what Alan Greenspan told us the other day. 

In fact, they're raiding the Social Security trust fund in order to pay for their mistakes in Iraq. 

And at that convention in New York last week, guess what? George Bush said he actually had a new idea. And you know what it is? Do you know what his new idea is? It's actually the bad old idea of privatizing Social Security and cutting your benefits. 

That's the wrong choice, wrong direction, wrong leadership for America. {APPLAUSE}

So as president, I will not privatize Social Security. I will not cut benefits. And I will not raise the retirement age, because when you've worked for a lifetime in America, America owes you what you've earned. {APPLAUSE}

And because of this president's wrong choices in Iraq, we're spending $200 billion there instead of investing in making America energy independent. 

George W. Bush's energy policy is to trust the big oil companies and the Saudis. In fact, a national news magazine just reported that a senior member of the Saudi royal family said that as far as they're concerned in the U.S. presidential election, it's Bush all the way. 

Well, I want an America that relies on its own ingenuity, on our own intervention, not the Saudi royal family. And that's what we need. {APPLAUSE}

Now, let me tell you what we're going to do. We're going to do what we could have been doing four years ago and three years ago and two years ago and all of last year and all of this year. We're going to invest in technology and in the vehicles of the future. We're going to invest so that no young American in uniform will ever be held hostage to America's dependence on oil from the Middle East. 

That's the right choice, that's the right direction, that's the right leadership for America. {APPLAUSE}

And because of this president's wrong choices, we're spending $200 billion in Iraq, while we're told that we can't afford to do everything that we should be doing for homeland security. I believe it's wrong to be opening fire houses in Baghdad and closing them down in the United States of America. {APPLAUSE}

It's wrong to cut money for our first responders. It's wrong to let 95 percent of the cargo that comes into this country get by without ever being physically inspected. 

That's the wrong choice, that's the wrong direction, that's the wrong leadership for America. {APPLAUSE}

So my friends, we're going to set a new direction for this country. We're going to defend this country here at home and we're going to do all we can possibly do in order to protect it from another terrorist attack. And we are going to make homeland security the kind of priority that it ought to be, not a political slogan. {APPLAUSE}

My friends, today we are bearing the cost of the war in Iraq almost alone: $200 billion and counting. 

Nearly two years after George W. Bush spoke to the nation from this very place, we know how wrong his choices were. He says he miscalculated. He calls Iraq a catastrophic success. But a glance at the front pages or a look at the nightly news shows brings home the hard reality: rising instability, spreading violence, growing extremism, havens now created that weren't there for terrorists who weren't even in the country before we went there.

And today even the Pentagon has admitted this very reality: that entire regions of Iraq are controlled by insurgents and terrorists. 

I call this course a catastrophic course that has cost us $200 billion because we went it alone, and we've paid an even more unbearable price in young American lives and the risks our soldiers take.

We need a new direction. We need statesmanship. We need leadership. We need the ability of a president with a fresh start and new credibility to open up the channels of communication. 

We need to do a whole bunch of things in Iraq that this president could have done and hasn't even tried to do. We need to really bring our allies to our side because they do have a stake in the outcome of Iraq and one of the great failures of this administration is in not convincing the world of that reality. {APPLAUSE}

We need to share the burdens, share the responsibility and the decision-making, share the reconstruction, reduce the cost to the American taxpayer and reduce the risk to the American soldier. 

We need to train Iraqi military and police. We need to train them more rapidly. We need to behave like we really are a nation at war and we need to get other people to behave that way with us.

We need to get more people in greater numbers ready to take over the job of protecting their own country. 

That's what I'll do as commander in chief, because that's the right way to get the job done and bring our troops home. {APPLAUSE}

You know, this president said one thing in his convention speech that's true. He said, "We all need to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations." But, you know, it's George W. Bush who has set low expectations and he's met them. {APPLAUSE}

He doesn't believe that American can be strong in the world while we also make progress here at home. He believes that we have to choose one or the other, and that's a false choice and I reject it. 

I believe we can lead in the world and lead America to greater progress and prosperity than we've ever known before. {APPLAUSE}

Half a century ago, from here in Union Terminal, thousands of soldiers waved one last goodbye to their families before heading off to the Second World War. In that war their bravery and the leaders made the right choices and they brought victory over tyranny and they brought prosperity here at home. 

When I'm president, America will once again stand up to our enemies without destroying or denying our best hopes here at home. We'll strengthen our military in order to meet new threats, but we'll also build and lead strong, new alliances around the world. {APPLAUSE}

We will build a stronger America with good jobs and better wages. Not paying you less money than the job you had for the job you lost overseas, but pushing the curve of technology and creativity, doing stem cell research, alternative and renewable energy, doing the things that begin to open up the avenues and opportunities of the future. {APPLAUSE}

With the right choices and the right leadership, we're going to set a new direction for America. We're going to build an America that's stronger at home and respected in the world. 

As Franklin Roosevelt once said, "The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will be our doubts of today." Well, I'll tell you, I believe there are no limits for tomorrow, but we need to make the right choices today. And with your help, we're going to restore the true greatness of our nation and we are going to set a new direction for the future.

Thank you. God bless you and God bless the United States of America. {APPLAUSE}

{/speech} 
