{title} Announcement of Candidacy for Presidency of the United States {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} Joseph Lieberman {/speaker}
{date} January 13, 2003 {/date}
{source} http://www.gwu.edu {/source}
{description} the final question-answer part has not been inserted {/description}


{speech} 

Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you, President Mark Parrott; thank you Madame President Samantha LaRoache and thank you Mr. Principal Carmine Lamone, who graduated from Stamford High School in the class of 1961, perhaps the second greatest class in Stamford High School history. 

I want to make clear to those who are not familiar to Stamford High School that when Mark or Samantha referred to me as a knight, that was not, you know, the office I'm running for; this school, we are known as the Black Knights of Stamford High. Anyway I thank you three and all of you; my classmates who are here to my left and my family to my right for the warm welcome, and in your case for the generous introduction you've given me. You have to be me to know how much this means to me. 

I wanted very much to come back home to Stamford to make this announcement today, because it was here that I came to appreciate the miracle of America. 

It was here that my parents Henry and Marcia – themselves children of immigrants – worked their way into the America's middle class and gave my sisters and me the opportunities they never had. It was here that I first understood the power of the promise of America – that no matter who you are or where you start, if you work hard and play by the rules, you can go as far in this country as your God-given talents will take you. {APPLAUSE} Some day you might even grow up to have the chance to run for president of the United States. {APPLAUSE} 

Let me say that when I was growing up and going to school right here, we called that promise the American Dream. It defined our freedom, our opportunity, and our strength. It set us apart as a nation from the rest of the world, but brought us together as a people, around our shared belief in an ever-brighter future for our country. 

Today, unfortunately, that American Dream is in jeopardy, threatened by hate-filled terrorists and tyrants from abroad and a weak economy that makes it harder for people to live a better life here at home. For too many Americans the middle class of which I've spoken is drifting out of reach. In fact, over the past two years, 2.8 million people have lost their job and 1.3 million people have fallen into poverty instead of rising to the middle class. 

That's unacceptable, but it doesn't have to remain that way or get worse. I am confident that we as nation have what it takes to meet these challenges and renew the American Dream. We can and must make it as real for those of you who are students here today as it was for me and my generation. {APPLAUSE} But that will only happen if our leaders are ready to lead, willing to fight for what's right for the American people, and able to rise above partisan politics and put our country first. {APPLAUSE} 

We must rise above partisan politics and put our country first to fix our economy and restore economic growth, because a strong middle class means a strong America. 

We must rise above partisan politics and unite to defeat the threat of terrorism and make America safe again. We must never shrink from using American power to defend our security and our ideals against evil in a time of war -- and we must never forget to use the power of our ideals as a force for good in the quest for peace. {APPLAUSE} 

We must rise above partisan politics to heal the racial divide, not open old wounds, and to give a new generation of immigrants their fair chance to live the American Dream. {APPLAUSE} 

We must rise above politics and restore independence to the White House, not compromise our economic or environmental or health security for political contributors or extreme ideologues. 

We must rise above partisan politics and stand up for our values here at home, because family and faith and responsibility matter more than power and partisanship and privilege. {APPLAUSE} 

My friends, two years ago we were promised a better America. But that promise has not been kept. 

So today I am ready to put our country first, to fight for what's right for the American people. I am ready to protect their security, to revive their economy, and to uphold their values. Yes I am ready to announce today that I am a candidate for President of the United States in 2004. {APPLAUSE} And I intend to win. {APPLAUSE} Thank you. Hey, there's nothing like a hometown crowd is there? {LAUGHTER} 

This morning I will be filing the necessary papers to form a campaign committee, and then I'll then begin working to earn the support of the American people. 

In the coming months, I want to convince them that I have the strength, the values, and the vision to lead our nation to a higher and safer ground. 

I want to talk with them also about the tough fights that I have waged before. 

As a young man, I marched with Dr. King and then went to Mississippi to fight for the right of African-Americans to vote. 

As my state's Attorney General, I stood with single moms to go after deadbeat dads -- and fought against oil companies that were trying to gouge consumers and corporate polluters who were spoiling our water and our air. 

As a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, I have consistently supported a strong defense, our men and women in uniform, and the use of our mighty American military to protect our security and defend our values -- in the Gulf War, in Bosnia, in Kosovo, and now again in Iraq. {APPLAUSE} 

As a father and, dear classmates, I must say now as a grandfather, I have taken on the entertainment industry for peddling violence and sex to our children. I've spoken up for parents who feel they are in competition with the popular culture to raise their children and give them the right values. 

And as the Democratic nominee for Vice President in 2000, I was proud to join with Al Gore in a great fight for America's families and their future. And I am also proud to say that in that election, as you may remember, Al and I got a half million more votes than our opponents, and even got more votes than any Democratic ticket in the history of the United States. {APPLAUSE} 

Campaigns are about the future, and in this campaign, I will talk about the tough fights ahead. Strengthening homeland security while protecting Social Security. Making affordable health care available to every American. Fixing our failing schools and restoring fiscal responsibility and economic opportunity, with the kinds of sensible tax cuts and sound investments that will bring back the prosperity of the Clinton-Gore years. {APPLAUSE} 

I intend to talk straight to the American people, and to show them that I'm a different kind of Democrat. I will not hesitate to tell my friends when I think they're wrong -- and to tell my opponents when I think they're right. 

I know that this will be a long and sometimes journey begun today across America for my family and me. We look forward to it with excitement and optimism. Some mornings when I wake up, I may not know exactly where I am. But I promise you this – I will always know who I am and what I stand for. {APPLAUSE} 

And every day along the way I know I will feel blessed by God to live in a land where dreams can become true. And every day I will remember what President Kennedy told my generation, which is that here on earth, God's work must truly be our own. 

So dear friends, here at home at Stamford High School, and my fellow citizens across America, I ask you to join with me in doing the urgent work of securing the hope of a better tomorrow for our beloved country. Let us begin here. Let us begin now. And let us begin together. Thank you. {APPLAUSE} Heya! {APPLAUSE}

Let me just thank everybody and say a personal word of thanks obviously to my family who is such a source of strength to me. To my mother, 88 years old, my mom Marcia. Mom sets the standard. I'll tell you my most favorite recent story about mom. On the night that Al Gore announced that he wasn't running again, which surprised us certainly in its timing and the decision, my staff and I got on a conference call and we all agreed we're not going to say anything tonight; it's Al's night, so don't answer any of the media inquiries, and we'll do it tomorrow. And about 11 o'clock that night I called mom and I said, How're you doing? And she said, Well gee it's been a very exciting day. I've done six or seven media interviews. {LAUGHTER} 

And to my beloved Hadassah. No one could have a better, more devoted partner. To our children; to our siblings; to the extended family who is here, God bless you and thank you. 

These young people over here to the left are, and a few out there, are my classmates from the class of 1960. This one here, Bonnie you know I had a big crush on her in fourth grade. And where's Vita; come on Vita and Alex come on out. Vita and Alex are the ones who always organize the class. {APPLAUSE} 

But you know I'm pursuing a dream here today with high ambitions but once earlier in my life, Vita and I, we had pretty good titles. I think it was our sophomore year at the prom. She was the queen and I was the king. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} But Alex married Vita. 

Anyway it's great to be home. Thank you, thank you all. 

{/speech} 
