{title} Speech: Laborers International Union of North America (LIUNA) 100th Anniversary Session {/title}
{event} Las Vegas, NV {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} April 14, 2003 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Well, first, thanks for the warm welcome. You've kind of spoiled me. I almost felt like I was President again. President Terry O'Sullivan, thanks for the introduction, for the great and energetic leadership you have provided to this union over the last three years. Thank you, General Secretary-Treasurer Armond Sabatoni, the entire General Executive board, and all of you who supported Al Gore and me through those eight good years for America. In my new role as a Senate spouse I want to thank you for the support you give to Hillary in the United States Senate as well.

You heard from Terry's introduction that the work that we did together made a big difference—and nothing I did in the White House would have been possible— if it hadn't been for you and the other men and women of the labor movement throughout our country. I am deeply indebted to you. I'd also like to say a special word of thanks to the president of the AFL-CIO, John Sweeney, who is here, and who has done a magnificent job in leading the American labor movement. I'd also like to thank you for something else today. I want to thank you, Mr. President, for letting me speak before Jesse Jackson. One of the things that I do not miss about being President is the honor that was always accorded to the President to speak last. Usually it was a good thing. When I had to speak behind Jesse, it was awful. Everything had already been said. He would say “Keep hope alive.” Today you kept a man from Hope alive by letting me speak first, I thank you for that, and I thank you, Jesse Jackson, for a lifetime of dedication to the men and women of the labor movement in America.

When I ran for President I said I wanted to build a bridge to the 21st century. I'm still trying to do that. But for a hundred years, you have been building America's bridges and America's highways; providing the human power that fuels state, local and national government; feeding America and keeping us healthy; maintaining our buildings and keeping our mail flowing. Your hard work has made America the envy of the world, and your commitment to working families, to diversity and to our security, both at home and abroad, have made us the most successful multiracial democracy in human history. For that every American should be grateful to you.

The news and the eyes of many Americans today are still on Iraq. Whatever our views of what happened leading up to this conflict, or whatever opinions we have about what should be done there once it's over, I think that I speak for all of us in saying that our prayers are still with the troops, their commanders and the commander-in-chief. We hope they come home safe with as little loss of life as possible, and I, and I know you, are elated that all of our POW's have been released unharmed.

At a time like this when we have troops abroad, when we've lost a hundred of our fine young men and women in a conflict, there is always a question about what the rest of us as citizens are supposed to do. Your father Samuel Gompers, at the beginning of our involvement in World War I, said these words. “It evolves upon liberty-loving citizens, and particularly the workers of this country, to see to it that the spirit and the methods of democracy are maintained within our country, while we are engaged in a war to establish them for all the nations of the world.” Now that is the great question. How do we keep the spirits and methods of democracy in the post-9/11 world? How do we fight a war against tyranny and terror abroad and still stay focused on the need to make America a more perfect union for all its people here at home? How do we balance the needs of national security with our highest democratic values? How do we keep celebrating our growing diversity, and come together around our common humanity, while we take prudent measures to prevent future terror attacks from fundamentalist fanatics?

The way we answer those questions will determine the quality and strength of the bridges America builds in this new century. There are really honest differences of opinion between Republicans and Democrats, especially in Washington, D.C.—differences that require us to choose, and to act. Sometimes the real substantive differences tend to get obscured in Washington, where personal attacks often dominate over policy debates, where asking prudent questions about national policy gets your patriotism questioned on right-wing talk shows, and where evidence is often put off in a little dark closet somewhere. I'll never forget what Hillary said to me early in our second term when some bizarre thing or another was going on in the nation's capitol. She said, “You know, Washington has become an evidence-free zone.” I thought that was one of the smartest things she ever said. I wish she'd been wrong about it. But she wasn't.

What she meant was that most of us Democrats believe we have to win our struggles through evidence and argument. We think we ought to make political decisions based on plain evidence of what's best for most of the American people; and we expect to have to argue and defend our positions against those who disagree with us. Most of our friends in this new, very conservative Republican Party, believe in their cultural entitlement to rule. Therefore, they govern by ideology and attack. They know how they want it to come out, and since they are entitled to have it come out that way, they just sort of make up the evidence as they go along.

For example, there is nothing irrational in their minds about the argument that they make about the eight years that I served as your President. The argument they make is that I am responsible for every single bad thing that's happened since I left office, and not a single good thing that happened when I was in office. Now, that makes perfect sense to them, because it's the argument they have to make to justify a sense of entitlement to rule, and to pursue a given ideology. The problem is, that doesn't work very well for America. Let's take just one case in point. Your president mentioned the Family and Medical Leave Law. Now that bill was vetoed in the previous Republican administration before I became President. It's the first bill I signed. Most Republicans voted against it, they said it would be terrible, terrible, for the economy. Never mind that 170 other countries already had family-leave laws, never mind that most of these countries actually provided paid family leave when a parent was sick or a baby was being born. It was against their ideology.

I thought it only made good sense that if people were happy and succeeding at home, as parents or children or brothers and sisters, they would be more productive at work. It turned out that after 35 million people had taken advantage of the Family Leave Law, we had the most rapid economic growth in our history. But that didn't stop them, once they got into power, from eliminating the option I left for states to provide paid family leave from surpluses in other accounts. They just got rid of it. Why? Because their ideology dictated that they do it, notwithstanding the evidence the family leave is one of the best things that's been done for this country in the last twenty years.

I'll never forget when we passed that economic plan in 1993, and every single member of the other party voted for it. Senator Gramm and the others said this was the worst piece of legislation that ever passed, that it would bring a terrible recession, and it would be the end of our free economic system, and that it would explode the deficit. Well, we created 50% more jobs in the ‘90s than they did in the ‘80s. We got rid of the deficit and ran a surplus for four years in a row for the first time in 70 years. We were on our way to being debt-free by the time the baby boomers retired. We took 100 times as many people out of poverty in our recovery as they did in the recovery of 1980s—100 times. After all that happened, well, they just made up another argument. They said, oh, he didn't have anything to do with that. That's because of some tax cut we passed way back in 1981 that quadrupled the national debt.

You have to believe in evidence and argument, if you want policies to work for the American people. So they got back in office and what's the first thing they did? They passed this massive tax cut in 2001. 40% of the benefits went to people like me—I love saying this because I never had a nickel before I left the White House. I pay taxes in New York so I pay more than anybody, and my attitude is if you've got money and you don't want to pay taxes to make America better, then move someplace where you don't have to pay any taxes. But you ought to pay your fair share of taxes if you live here. So what did they do? In 2001 they adopted this humongous tax cut that's heavily weighted to upper-income people, and they did it because they said, “Well, we have a $5.8 trillion projected surplus when we took office.” They decided to get rid of it as quick as they could, and they've done a brilliant job of that. You know, that's real money to go from a $5.8 trillion projected surplus to a $2 trillion projected deficit over the next ten years. That takes some doing. It's a massive accomplishment.

But what happened? They passed this tax cut before they knew what our income was going to be; before they knew what our expenses were going to be; before they knew what emergencies we would have. So the economy turned down and that caused our income to drop and our expenses to go up, and then on September 11th we had one whale of an emergency. Of course we had to deal with all that, but we'd already given away the store. If you ran your business that way, if you ran your household finances that way, you would all be broke and you wouldn't be able to afford to come to Las Vegas to this convention. That's the way your country is run, because ideology dictates it, not evidence and argument. We are living with the consequences. So I say to you that one of your big jobs today—and for the next 100 years—is to get America back on the path of evidence and argument, and away from the politics of ideology, anger and attack.

Now, the 2000 election was fought to a virtual dead heat. We won by a half-million popular votes, and they won Florida by 5 to 4 in the Supreme Court. So under our Constitutional system, they got to take over. But that was hardly a mandate to blow the whole surplus, and turn it into a deficit by giving people in my income group tax cuts we didn't need that are bad for the economy. There was no mandate for the assault on clean air, on the California redwoods, on the national forests I tried to protect. There was no mandate for an assault on the labor movement. But that is the consequence of governance by ideology, attack and anger, over government by evidence and argument.

When I came to Washington, I wanted to lead America into a new century that is obviously characterized by global interdependence, a world where we can't escape each other. So I thought the first thing I had to do was to get America going again, to create opportunity for every responsible American, to build a community of all Americans, and then to make us the leading force for peace, freedom, prosperity and security around the world. I thought I had to be pro-business and pro-labor, pro-growth and pro-environment, pro-work and pro-family. I think it worked out pretty well for the American people.

Since I left office I've tried to keep working on the things that I can still have an impact on that I cared about as President. I've worked on bringing economic opportunity to poor communities at home and around the world; on bridging the divides between race and religion around the world; on fighting the scourge of AIDS in the Caribbean and Africa; on increasing educational opportunities and opportunities for citizen service for young people in the United States and around the world. It's all immensely rewarding, and reminds me that we don't ever have to wait for our government to do a lot of good—all of us can do a lot of good on our own. But neither can we ignore the fact that the decisions of our government will shape the world we live in, in profound ways.

If you look at what happened on September 11th, that was the down-side of an interdependent, globalized world. We got the benefits, the up-side, in the 1990s. I knew the downside was out there. We worked hard to fight the terrorists. We broke up twenty of the Al Qaeda cells: We stopped a lot of terrorist attacks. We limited the spread and increased the destruction of weapons of mass destruction. But what happened on September 11th, 2001 is that Al Qaeda used the forces of global interdependence against us. They used open borders, easy travel, easy immigration, easy access to information and technology, and they turned a plane full of jet fuel into a weapon of mass destruction. Why did they do that? They did that because they don't want to live in our world. They don't recognize its benefits, they define their responsibilities differently, and their values are different. Like fanatics everywhere, they thought they were in possession of the sole truth.

We have to substitute for that a whole different view. We have to build a world of shared values, shared benefits, and shared responsibilities. The values have to be pretty simple. Our differences are important—they make life interesting—but our common humanity matters more. Every person counts, every person deserves a chance, every person has a responsible role to play, but we all do better when we work together. With those values, we can construct a world where we maximize our opportunities, and minimize the horrible dangers of terror and mass destruction. In order to do it, we do have to have a security policy to fight terrorism and weapons of mass destruction. We also have to have a policy like Harry Truman did after World War II where we take a little money to make a world with more friends and fewer terrorists, helping people to make a living and put their kids in school, and fight the scourge of AIDS, TB, malaria, and other diseases.

We have to have a policy that keeps trying to build international cooperation. I know it's fashionable today to bash the UN and to make jokes about the French and the Germans. But I'll tell you one thing. It's important not to forget that the whole UN was with us on 9/11, and today, there are still German and French soldiers serving with us in Afghanistan trying to get the guys who really caused all the death on 9/11, Osama bin Laden and his crowd. So we can't afford to walk away from all that.

But today what I want to say to you is this. We cannot hope to remain strong abroad unless we keep getting stronger at home. The military force, which has done so well in Iraq with relatively small loss of life on both sides, was reorganized and funded, largely in the second term of my administration, while we continued to run a surplus because all of you had jobs and America was working. When I ran in 1992 I had to go around trying to convince a lot of my Democratic supporters that we had to be more involved in the world, that we couldn't be strong at home unless we were strong abroad. We couldn't forget about our responsibilities in the world just because we had problems at home. Now we've got the reverse problem. Washington acts like we can be strong around the world, and we can just forget what is happening to America and to our future here at home. That's not right either. The power of our example is always as important as the force of our arms.

I don't think we're stronger over the long run to go from a $5.8 trillion surplus to a $2 trillion deficit. I don't think it was a good idea to adopt that big tax cut and go into deficits. You know how that first tax cut's being paid for? By depleting the Social Security and Medicare trust funds. When I left office we had enough money in surplus to make Social Security good without any changes till 2052— almost the end of the life expectancy of all but the most fortunate baby boomers. Medicare was good till 2030—halfway through the life expectancy of the baby boomers, with plenty of time to figure out what to do, how to protect our country, and how to hold it together. We threw it all away to give me a tax cut.

This last budget is even worse. It gave another big tax cut heavily tilted to upper-income people. The budget also pays for school repairs for Iraqi schools, health care for Iraqi kids, and modernizing the transportation of Iraq. Now, I'm not against that—we just blew a lot of it up. But I think it's interesting that we're funding what they need—which I'm for—and giving me another tax cut, with a budget that has already eliminated all the funds to repair America's schools and to hire 100,000 more teachers when we have the biggest student body in our history.

Now, in this budget, proposing another tax cut for me and help for the kids of Iraq, the Administration proposes to kick 500,000 poor American children out of their after-school programs, when we know that keeps them in school and out of trouble, and improves their learning. This budget gets rid of the entire COPS program, which put 110,000 police on the street when I was President, and gave you a 26-year low crime rate. We're now getting rid of our help to local governments to hire police at a time when they're so broke they're already laying police off and the crime rate is going up. I thought this was a tough-on-crime administration. This budget provides no new money to fund the very good bill President Bush signed in 2001 to improve our public schools—the Leave No Child Behind Act. Now we just leave the funding behind.

Now, maybe you think that's okay. But if you don't, you've got to talk to somebody. If you govern by evidence and argument, the first rule is, when you find yourself in a hole, quit digging. If you govern by ideology and attack, the first rule when you find yourself in a hole is—apparently—give me a bigger shovel, please. Look, we're all laughing, but this is serious. We've got 100 young people who lost their lives because they were asked to defend freedom halfway around the world. We've got poor people being asked to sacrifice, we've got middle-class people being asked to give up the certainty of Social Security and Medicare. In this ideology-driven atmosphere, where we're all being told we have to sacrifice to fight terror, what is my sacrifice? They're asking me to exert the energy necessary to open the envelope to give myself another tax cut while a half-million poor American schoolchildren are going to be thrown out of their after-school programs. It is horrible economics, it is bad ethics, it is wrong, and it will not stand the test of evidence. You ought to fight it with everything you've got.

{CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} I can't do that. {LAUGHTER} I want to say something about that, though. We have these elections that roll around every four years. In 2002, my party, our party, lost a few seats in the Senate and the House. We were outspent badly, but the election was also fought on a false argument. It was more our fault than the public's because we let them get away with it. They couldn't win the national security argument on Afghanistan and Osama bin Laden because we were all for what they were doing there, and they couldn't win the national security argument on Iraq because more than half the Democrats had voted to give the President the authority to use force if the United Nations inspection process failed. So they decided they'd be for the Homeland Security Bill that they had opposed for seven months. They were stomp-down against it, and all of a sudden they were for it. 24 hours later, if you weren't for it, you were no longer a patriot and you had put America's security at risk. Did that mean they put our security at risk for the seven months they were against it? Talk about a bogus argument. But we let them get away with it, so it's our fault, and I'm not whining, just pointing it out.

Meanwhile, we tried to do things to increase our security, that we should have made into issues. We worry about whether Saddam Hussein has weapons of mass destruction, and they'll probably find some. But let me tell you, the biggest stocks of chemical and biological weapons are still in the former Soviet Union. They are also in other places. And there's fissionable material out of which nuclear bombs can be made all over the world. The Democrats, led by Chet Edwards from Texas, had a bill last year to increase funding to go in and secure and destroy those stocks. Our friends in the Republican Party opposed it. We ought to come back and do it and say, that would really make us safer. We wanted to do more than they do to protect the roads, the bridges, the water systems, the tunnels, the airports of this country. That's real homeland security.

I just want to say something about the Presidential campaign. I'm not going to endorse any of them because they've all done a lot for me and I like them all. But I am going to say this. Every time a bunch of people like the crowd we've got now start running, a lot of the pundits say, oh, they're all small, they're all Pygmies, they're all this and all that. That's a bunch of bull. If you look at what these people have done for our country in the positions they have already had, they have arguably done more for America than any other group of people we've had running for President in over forty years. They're just not famous yet. But they are good; and they are able. There are plenty of people in that crowd capable of being good Presidents. I think you ought to give them a respectful hearing, and you ought to know that I know these people and I have confidence in their capacity to grow in this Presidential process, and to serve. You don't have the option not to choose, based on the evidence and the arguments.

Let me close with this. I'm not young anymore, and I liked the eight years we had, but for most of my life, my side lost. Because most of the time when things are going well in America, it's easy for the people with money and power to spin some story and squeeze by. I'm not against money and power. My administration made more millionaires and billionaires than the Republicans ever did. But a lot of them didn't feel good about it because we made them pay their fair share of taxes and moved a lot of folks out of poverty too. It's more ideologically comforting to think that you're whipping the government and taking the money away. But our deal works. All we have to do is to be willing to stand up for what we know is right.

I'm going to tell you something. Ten years from now we're going to look back and shake our heads. We had a surplus, declining poverty, the number of children without health insurance going down for the first time in years, the welfare rolls cut in half, the economy growing and environment getting better, with cleaner air, cleaner water, safer food—and we decided that we would squander all that and our ability to deal with the retirement of the baby boomers, by giving ourselves huge tax cuts before we knew what our income, expenses and emergencies were, and then we had to spend more money to deal with a crisis abroad and with domestic safety at home. We will look back on this period and say, what in the wide world happened to us?

It doesn't have to be that way. But this union has not been here for 100 years because you were quiet in the face of challenge, or because you wimped out when the going got tough. Now I'm telling you, most Americans still want a country that works for them. Most Americans know that we can't be strong abroad unless we're strong at home. Most Americans know that there ought to be opportunity for every responsible citizen, and that those of us who have been most blessed in this country should make the largest contribution to future generations. Most people know that. But if you don't stand up for evidence and argument and American values, and the future of our children and grandchildren, who will do it? If you want to be here 100 years from now, then you make sure we reverse this wrong course. Thank you and God bless you. 

{/speech}
