{title} Remarks at Hamilton College {/title}
{event} Clinton, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} November 9, 2004 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Whoa! Thank you very much. Thank you for the wonderful welcome. I must say, President Stewart, if I had known that you had been {APPLAUSE} at that concert that my little dance band played at St. Joseph's that night, when I was a very green 18 year-old, barely out of Arkansas, I might have been too embarrassed to show up tonight. {LAUGHTER} But I thank you for what you said about it. I did write about it extensively that evening in my book, because it was a searing memory I had of going into my first New York high-rise apartment, walking in Manhattan for the first time, going into Tad's Steakhouse and buying a big steak for a dollar and a half. {LAUGHTER}

I'm honored to be here and I thank you for inviting me. I thank the Sacerdote family for endowing these lectures. I know I follow a distinguished group of people to this podium. I also want you to know that I was prepared tonight by, as the President said, the Junior Senator from New York, who is obsessed with Upstate New York. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} You can now-- Even though, as you might know, I've been otherwise occupied for the last few weeks trying to stay among the living. {LAUGHTER} I could, tonight, pass the test on every economic project, every education project, every high technology project, every homeland security project, every law enforcement project in which she's been involved in these counties up here. And I want you to know that she's proud to represent you and I think she's doing a wonderful job, so I thank you for that. {APPLAUSE}

I've always wanted to come here, that some of your alums are friends of mine, including the great Sol Lenowitz, who negotiated the Panama Canal Treaty and, {APPLAUSE} which played a role in the 1980 Election for President, which is the last one I can remember that was like this one. Where so many people came to the polls because they said they were doing the will of God, and most of them thought God was against the Panama Canal Treaty. {LAUGHTER} The legendary Civil Rights Leader, Bob Moses, Elihu Root, Ezra Pound, and my friends, the Governor and First Lady of Iowa, Tom and Christie Vilsack. {APPLAUSE} I love the legacy that you have given to America.

I'd also like to thank the students here who worked so hard in the last election to guaranty that students would be able to vote where they go to college. {APPLAUSE} I must say, I was shocked by a lot of the efforts that were made to discourage some people from voting in the last election. There was a flyer handed out in an African-American neighborhood in Milwaukee that told people if anybody in their family had ever been convicted of anything, they couldn't vote; if they'd had a traffic violation, they couldn't vote; and if they violated the law, they could go to jail and their children could be taken away from them. I've never been afraid of people voting, but I thought that was amazing.

But, you know, the principle, that univ college and university students should be able to vote either in the place of their residence or in the town where they attend school was established by the Supreme Court more than 30 years ago, and I was disappointed to see it under assault in this election and gratified that students, like those of you here, were willing to fight to make sure that your voices were heard and your votes were counted, and I thank you for that. {APPLAUSE}

The President told me after we'd finished speaking, I was going to do some questions and answers. And I found normally in these events, people would rather hear me answer your questions than answer my own, which is what I do in my speeches. So I'm going to pare down my remarks just a little tonight so I have more time for questions.

I'd like to start by just making a few observations about this election, in terms of the larger context of the world in which the students here are moving into. Regardless of your party affiliation, you ought to be glad that so many people voted. There was a huge increase in turnout. I believe it's the only time in, in the last 40 years (except for 1992, when more than half the registered voters voted) and well over half voted this time. We had an even bigger turnout.

There were 10 million new voters. Basically the Democrats registered more new voters and voted them, but the Republicans did a better job of turning out their previously registered voters than the Democrats. I supported John Kerry and John Edwards because I liked their ideas on security, on managing the troubles in Iraq, on the economy, healthcare, education, crime control, stem cell research and on building a clean energy future. The American people made a different decision. For most of the time since I've been old enough to vote, the American people have made a different decision than I did. {LAUGHTER}

I congratulate the President and the Vice President on their reelection on what I think was a brilliant campaign. It's too early to draw any definitive conclusions, but it seems to me, that based on what I've seen, about 4% of the voters made their decision in the last 24 hours and most of them decided to vote for the President, because even though they were open to changing the direction of the country, they were reluctant to change leaders in the middle of the struggle against terror and the management of the problems in Iraq.

To get to that point, as I said, the Republicans were astonishingly successful in pulling out previously registered voters. In Nevada, for example, John Kerry carried Reno, which is very unusual. I'm not sure I ever carried Reno, and carried Nevada twice. But he lost the State because 90% of the registered voters in the small towns and rural areas turned out to vote, most of them against him.

There was an astonishingly turnout among Evangelical Christians, who said they were voting on the basis of moral values. A great deal needs to be said about this and thought about this, and I'm not prepared to say everything I think now, but I will say this. I do not believe either party has a monopoly on morality, or truth. {APPLAUSE} I do not believe that-- I do not believe that the Democrats can seek to be a truly national party. They may win some more national elections, but we cannot be nationally competitive unless we feel comfortable talking about our convictions. Denial is not an acceptable strategy when issues are of obsessive concern to huge numbers of the American people.

We had a story to tell about abortion. It wasn't told. We had a position to take on gay marriage. You might be surprised to know that when I ran in 1992, I said I thought abortion should remain legal in the first two trimesters, but should be made more rare. And I was as good as my word. We had an aggressive strategy to subsidize adoptions, to remove all the financial disincentives for young mothers to stay at home with their parents, stay in school and raise their children. To help young mothers, who had babies, to move into second change homes, and to support both education and work benefits for people who didn't have much of either. The result was there was a nearly 25% decline in the number of abortions in the eight years I was President. {APPLAUSE} In the last four years In the last four years, the number has increased. Now you might argue that that doesn't matter. The only moral position is are you for or against repealing Roe v. Wade?

And the only way to promote what the President calls “the culture of life” is to return to the days when we put poor young women and their doctors in jail and rich people find a way to do what they're going to do anyway. But at least we had a story to tell about which was the more pro-life position. I'm proud of the fact that we reduced the number of abortions by 25% without repealing Roe v. Wade and without demonizing anybody, but trying to promote what the President calls “the culture of life.” And I think that personally, we made a mistake not telling it.

With regard to the gay marriage issue, it was an overwhelming factor in the defeat of John Kerry. There's no question about it, and it was just one of those circumstances that happens in life, that the Massachusetts Supreme Court made that decision. But he had a position that I don't think most Americans knew or wouldn't take seriously, which was that for over 200 years, marriage has been left to religious doctrine and State law. So you would think a religious conservative would favor State's rights and church doctrine. But with one decision of one Supreme Court, we all of a sudden had a Constitution Amendment, designed, I think, more to whip people up, inflame them, scare them, make them feel threatened and make them stop thinking about other issues. It worked superbly but probably part of it's our fault for not making it clear that, what our position was.

I signed a Bill called “The Defensive Marriage Act,” which simply said that every State got to decide this issue and that no State would be bound by the decision of another. And I still believe that. I still think I did the right thing. Eleven States had referendums this time; Massachusetts is going to have referendum on its own Supreme Court decision, the next time, at the earliest available time I don't see why we needed to change 200 years of our policy. This ought to be up to churches and States, and I don't think that that means that the Democrats are the enemies of traditional marriage or the nuclear family. Even Senator Kerry said he intended to vote for the Massachusetts Amendment when it came up on the Ballot, but none of that was heard, and I think partly because we didn't discuss it enough.

On the other hand, this election raised a lot of questions that were not answered, which is the more moral position when it comes to going from surplus to deficits and deficits that will dramatically accelerate over the next decade as the baby-boom generation requires, and now unconscionable pressures will be put on Medicare and Social Security largely because we squandered the surplus.

When you raise your children, sometimes you have to tell them, “no.” We were told that somebody's tough and somebody's weak. But I think the tough position is to say, “Look, I know you guys would like to have a tax cut (people like me, with lots of money, always want more). {LAUGHTER} But you can't have it because we've got have homeland security. We've got to have education. We've got to have healthcare. We've got to save some of this money to pay the debt down, get the interest payments down, stabilize our long-term economy and have some money left when all the baby-boomers retire.” {APPLAUSE} And now I think that was an ethical position.

The question was never answered. It was never answered. Why is this the first time we've ever been involved in military conflicts with astronomical defense spending, when we've had not one, but two major tax cuts, half of which went to the top 1% of the income group. So why was I, and people in my income group, why were we the only Americans not asked to make any contribution at all? Nothing, to the rebuilding of the American economy, to dealing with our healthcare crisis and to fighting the war on terror. Most people I know, Republican and Democrat, in my income group don't think it's right and resent the fact that no one ever asked us to make a contribution. We didn't answer that.

We didn't answer, “What are we going to do now, if they have affordable healthcare for the uninsured?” The number of uninsured have gone up by 5 million in the last four years. What are we going to do to make America less dependent on foreign oil and do our part to fight global warming? What are we going to do to secure the future of Social Security? To improve homeland security? These are real challenges. This is the kind of stuff a President does all day, every day, the Congress does. And millions of Americans didn't vote on it at all. Unless you think I'm being too partisan. I don't think this is a partisan issue.

When I was a Governor-- You might be interested in this. I was, and I tried to write about this in my book. I was Governor of Arkansas for 12 years, every single election, my vote went up among Republicans and independents in the urban areas and the suburbs because they believed in what I was doing to diversify and advance our economy and to lift the education standards. And it went down in some rural Democratic areas because they thought that no matter what I did, I could never benefit them economically and by raising education standards, I threatened some of the small school districts.

I never thought of myself as an ideologue and I certainly never thought of myself as the sort of the-- neither Hillary nor I did, the demons that Republicans loved to hate until I went to Washington and found a very different world than the world most real Americans live in.

So I say this not as a Democratic primarily, but as an American. I can't run for anything. The good news is I can say whatever I think. {APPLAUSE} The bad news is, since I'm not President, nobody listens anymore, but anyway.... {LAUGHTER}

But I want you think about this. Do you really want, in a world where we are pleading, pleading, the Muslims of the world to abandon Islamic fundamentalism and the demonization of Jews and Christians? Do we want an America, which is deeply divided and where people basically vote, not based on the issues, not based on the evidence, but based on who is moral and who isn't? Let your voting habits depend on what team you're on, rather than what the issues of the day are and the proposed solutions are. Is that really where you want to be?

New York's a good example, a case in point. When Hillary started running for the Senate, the conventional wisdom is you've got to get a big vote in New York City because only some of the suburban areas are Democratic. The rest are Republicans and you're going to get murdered Upstate. But we'd been to Upstate New York. I said, “You know, they're not that different than the people I grew up with, and they have all the same challenges. Why don't you just forget about their political party and go up there? And talk to people about where they are and what their dreams are, what their problems are, and see whether we can get people together.” And it's worked pretty well for her and I think it'll work pretty well for our country. We have no call to go into the future divided based on who's a good or a bad person, or a good or a bad party.

And once you get to the point when you're making a decision in politics, without regard to evidence, just based on identity, you can get in a lot of trouble in a hurry, so I-- {APPLAUSE} I say that to all of you. I think that the current divisions are partly the fault of me, of the people in my party, for not engaging the Christian Evangelical community in a serious discussion of what it would take to promote a real culture of life and what the best strategy for reducing abortions is. An open discussion of where we are on the issues of gays in America. I think we can get a majority of Americans to support the Employment and Non-Discrimination Act, which I tried for years to get through the Congress without success. To recognize the fact that we have a vested interest in encouraging people who make commitments to each other not to be punished for those commitments, and in letting {APPLAUSE} And I personally believe that because of the volatility of it, that the whole issue of gay marriage should be left, as it was in this last election, to religious doctrine and State law, just like it has been ever since we started out as a country. Now that's what I believe. It may be that people disbelieve us but that's not an inherently less moral position, what I said. We don't go off and amend the Constitution every time the Supreme Court says we don't agree with.

A man came through the line with me tonight and reminded me that he worked with me on a Bill called the “Religious Freedom Restoration Act,” which I signed happily and believed in, because I'm a radical believer in the First Amendment, including the rights of all those people and all those churches that believe they were doing God's will by beating every Democrat they could find on the ballot. And I would die for their right to do that, because I think the only reason we're still around here, after over 200 years, and the most religious country in the world becoming evermore diverse, is that we predicted that. So here's one case where this Republican Supreme Court was to the right of me, because they struck down the Religious Freedom Restoration Act and I thought they were wrong. But-- Or I was to the right of them, if you will.

But we have to recognize that politics in its domain is fundamentally different from religion in its domain, and from science in its domain. This is part science and part art politics. It's part listening to the people and part leading. It is has to be animated like every other human activity, by faith and values, but we can't expect to operate completely without regard to evidence and without regard to those who have different ways of searching for the truth.

Now, having said all that, whoever you voted for, you ought to be in a pretty good frame of mind tonight, for the following reasons. I'm old enough now and I've run enough times, and I've governed enough, succeeded enough and failed enough to know that there's a limit to how much any election can repeal the underlying tides of history. And to know that you can only succeed in the end if you're swimming with the deepest hopes and most profoundly honorable aspirations of humanity.

I think there will be great opportunities for good things to happen in the next four years, if the Republicans and Democrats in Washington will work together. After the Republicans won a majority when I was President, we did an enormous amount together: on the economy; on empowering poor people; on getting investments into poor areas; on relieving the debt of the poorest countries in the world; and in a whole range of other areas. There were also days when we could never reach an agreement. They wouldn't ever adopt a senior citizens' drug program I wanted because the drug companies didn't like it, so they waited and got their subsidy. But I think I was right, and so we couldn't get that done, but we got a lot done.

I could never get the Congress to seriously address the problem of climate change and the need for a clean energy future. I once joked to Newt Gingrich that I considered the major accomplishment of my second term as President, when I proposed a 25% tax credit for the production or purchase of clean energy products and he beat it. I said, “Newt, I have finally found a tax cut you're against.” And I'm joking about that, but we got a lot of stuff done.

So they'll have opportunities to do things, but I'm optimistic for other reasons. Because the fundamental underlying realities sooner or later, whether or not in these four years, are going to compel us to abandon demonizing one another in favor of cooperating. We live in an independent world and an evermore diverse country. Indeed, I think part of the reason for the kind of almost religious reaction supporting extremely conservative candidates is the sense that things are spinning out of control and people feel their life options are narrowed and their control even their children's upbringing and what they see on television and how they live is limited and they want to reassert it. I want to talk about how we can all reassert it.

But the first thing I want to hammer home is this. No one can change this. The world is becoming more interdependent, which simply means for good or ill, we can't escape each other. And the country is becoming not only more interdependent but more diverse, which means for good or ill, no matter how many elections our side or the other side wins, we will become more diverse racially, more diverse religiously, more diverse culturally. No one can stop that.

The second thing I want to say is that no one can avoid dealing with the major challenges of the moment. There are serious security challenges facing this country, mostly from non-State actors, like Mr. bin Laden and the al Qaeda. Our goal ought to be to stop big, bad things from happening; to take down the terror networks; to limit the reach and destroy as much as possible, the materials of weapons of mass destruction; and to deal with the world in a way that removes a lot of the grievances of poverty, ignorance, disease and the absence of peace.

The second thing we have to do is keep working to make America better. It's no good going out and asserting that we're the greatest country and that we're good. People make their own judgments about whether we're great or good, people in this country and in other countries. They make their own judgments based on what they see, not what based on what we say. That's why I think it's important that we not abandon our children.

I can say this. I'm the oldest of the baby-boomers. God, I hate it, but I am. {LAUGHTER} It's hard for me to believe sometimes. But, you know, I'll be 65 years old in 2011, the oldest of the baby-boomers. And when we retire, all of us, about eight or nine years after that, there'll only be about two people working for every one person in retirement and drawing Social Security. I think we have an ethical responsibility not to do what we're doing now, which is to basically bankrupt the retirement and healthcare systems of the seniors so our children will be supporting us instead of our grandchildren. I think that's wrong. {APPLAUSE}

We have an obligation to be smart about Homeland Security. I was really disappointed in the last election, that that was one of many issues that were never seriously debated in detail. This new department has reorganized a lot of things but we're still only checking 5% of the containers, cargo containers, at our ports and airports. I think that's a mistake. It's an open invitation to invade one of them with a bomb, a chemical, a nuclear, a biological device. I think it was a mistake that, in all the debates (and this was something that neither candidate that was fully responsible for, because they were answering questions asked of them), but I was aghast that there was only one question in the last two debates about energy and the environment. When I believe that-- {APPLAUSE}

Number one, I believe that the differences between the two candidates were honest and heartfelt, and therefore they could both speak with a clear conscience and without trying to maneuver. And number two, I think it is likely to affect our future and our children and grandchildren's future on this planet, and I know it will have an immediate impact on the economic prospects for America. Maybe we can talk about that in a moment. But I basically People ask me all the time, “Well, if we can't do anything about outsourcing and we can't stop it, where are we going to get the jobs in this decade that we got from high technology when you were President?” And I say, “Well, we could get a couple of million if we made a serious decision to go to a clean energy future.” To have blended fuel vehicles and clean fuel vehicles {APPLAUSE} to retrofit our homes and our office buildings and to build new buildings according to higher standards and to retrofit our factories and our, our utility companies. Anybody who tells you that we can't make a dramatic dent in the, the use of greenhouse gases in this country, is somebody who has no faith in the American people.

If you set up the right kind of And the government doesn't have to do it. It would help if we had higher standards. But if we had the right sort of financial incentives, the kind of financial incentives we gave the oil companies at the beginning of the 20th Century to build a petroleum-based economy. You would be amazed at how quickly we could dramatically reduce the emission of greenhouse gases in America, do our part to combat global warming and create an unbelievable number of high-paying jobs.

I'm going to dedicate my Library in a few days, down in Little Rock, and there are two buildings. One's a, basically is the Museum building. It's kind of the first museum of the 21st Century. It tells the story of how we moved into a new era of working and living. The other contains all the documents, the 2 million pictures and all the artifacts. That building is covered with solar reflectors, made in America. {APPLAUSE} The Museum is a big glass and steel structure and I wanted it to be light all the time, so we got a new kind of glass, that's kind of a grainy plate to go over the first glass. So when you're inside, it always looks daylight but it blocks out 99.9% of the ultraviolet light.
There are miles of walkway. Underneath it, we have tubing that can carry hot water to heat the place or cool water to cool the place, and we're going to reduce the energy consumption by at least 30%, all with technology made in America. {APPLAUSE} It could be made in Upstate New York. It could be made in Arizona. It could be made in Oregon. It could be made anywhere. None of this was discussed.

Now, so I think we do need a security policy. We need a policy to make a world with more friends and fewer terrorists, by dealing with poverty, disease and ignorance and the fact that only one in four, one in four people in the world don't have any access to clean water. I do a lot of that with my Foundation, but we can't do it only as private citizens. We have to have good public policies. And we have to keep making America better. There will be lots of opportunities, I'll say this again, in the next four years for us to things in this regard in a bipartisan fashion, if we'll just stop screaming at each other and start listening to each other.

I think that Mr. Arafat's illness will give us a terrific opportunity if the Palestinians unite and have a leadership of people who are committed to peace. They're all been there a long time. They know exactly what was on the table in 2000, when I made a peace proposal, and Mr. Arafat turned it down. Prime Minister Barak of Israel took it. A year and a half later, Arafat said he wanted it and by then he had an Israeli government who wouldn't give it to him and an Israeli public who didn't trust him. Peace works better than war. In the eight years I was President, there were 256 Israelis killed by terror. In the last four years, over 1,000 have been. We have to

That brings me to the last point I want to make. The Middle East is the ultimate example of global interdependence. The Israelis and the Palestinians, whether they're working together or shooting at each other, are no less interdependent in either condition. One condition is negative interdependence, the other is positive, but they certainly cannot escape each other. Therefore, what they need to do is a microcosm of what we all need to do. We have got to build a world of sharing. We have to share the responsibilities. We have to share the benefits and we have to share certain fundamental values that should cross every religious line. Everybody counts, everybody deserves a chance. We all do better when we work together. And our differences are important, worth debating, worth fighting for, but our common humanity, in the end, will always matter more. {APPLAUSE}

Now you have decide if you believe that. But if you do, then on every issue, there's a reasonable case to be made for the more conservative position or the more liberal position. On every issue, you could organize a national political party in America or any other country in the world, one slightly right of center, the other slightly left of center. The only thing that can derail us if we get into a position where we say, “Politics is evidence free. Don't bother me with the facts. And if you're not in my party, you've got nothing to tell me. And if you don't agree with me, then you deserve whatever you get.”

We got here, as Americans, to this place, on this night, by a common nation of fighting and cooperating. We got here because the framers of this Constitution of ours understood that. They limited power and protected all of our liberties, including our freedom of speech, our freedom of association, our freedom of the press and our freedom of religion.

This town I'm in is not named for me. {LAUGHTER} It is named for George Clinton, one of the few men in the history of the republic who served as Governor longer than I did, 21 years in two different stints, and also served as Thomas Jefferson's Vice President. Thomas Jefferson gave us the Declaration of Interdependence, but he didn't favor a strong national government with a strong national economy and a strong national legal system.

Alexander Hamilton favored a strong national legal system {APPLAUSE} and economy. John Marshall favored a strong national legal system and economy. They were right and he was wrong. But he was a very great man, and we would be much the poorer if we did not have the Declaration of Independence. If we did not have Thomas Jefferson's Declaration on the walls of Jefferson Memorial in Washington, that when he thought of slavery, he trembled to think that God was just. He knew better than that. And he speaks to us down to the present day. But because we had a system of separation of powers, limitation of powers, fostering, flourishing debates of conflict and cooperation, we wound up with the best of both worlds. We got Mr. Hamilton when he was right. We got Justice Marshall when he was right, and we got to keep what was right about Thomas Jefferson. We'd do well to remember that today.

This is a great country. Because more than half the time, we've done the right thing. And because more than half the time, while doing the right thing, we were smart enough to remember that none of us ever, on this earth, would have the absolute truth. Thank you, and God bless you. {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE ; CHEERS} 

{/speech}
