{title} Remarks of President Clinton at Goldman Sachs & Company Meeting {/title}
{event} Goldman Sachs & Company Meeting  {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} June 13, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

I always knew Bud was a trailblazer, but that's the first time I've been introduced as the next First Lady of the United States. {LAUGHTER} Actually I like this. I like, you know, being “Hillary's husband” now, that's what I am. I told Hillary whatever she's going to do in politics, she better hurry up because pretty soon we'd be only known as “Chelsea's parents.” {LAUGHTER} I'm in that stage of my life.

The great thing about not being in politics anymore and not being in the White House is that I can say exactly what I think, and the bad thing is nobody gives a rip. {LAUGHTER} I'm going to have a good time anyway. I want to thank you for having me here and for having my guest and my great friend, the former football Coach at South Carolina and Notre Dame, Minnesota, Arkansas, North Carolina State, the New York Jets, my great friend Lou Holtz. Thank you for coming, Lou. I want to thank you. {APPLAUSE} I tried to get him to give the speech because he's so much funnier than I am but he declined. I also want to thank Goldman Sachs for being so good to me when I was President and lending me so much talent beginning but not ending with Bob Ruben.

What I'd like to do tonight is to speak maybe almost a little in shorthand about where I think we are in the world today and what I think we should be doing and where I think we should be going. But the first thing I want to say is, I think it's important that every citizen, and we have mostly but not exclusively, Americans here today. We have people from all over the world. Every person who is as active as you are in the global economy should have a theory about how the world works and a theory about how we should respond to it as citizens. That includes what you think government policy ought to be but is not limited to what government policy ought to be. And that may seem self-evident to you but it isn't really.

I'm reading now. I'm reading books that are written about the time I was President, reviews of books that were written about the time I was President. Whether they're favorable or unfavorable, the one great shortcoming they all have, except for mine (how's that for a little plug) {LAUGHTER} is they undersell the importance of ideas, and yet you all have an idea about what you do. Don't you? I mean you have theory about what you do, all day every day, about how the markets work, why you pursue the strategies you do, what's ethical and unethical, what's effective and ineffective. And yet when you read about politics or current events, it's either totally dominated by gossip (like we spent three holes talking about the Jackson verdict today) or it's inside gossip, or the inching, whether it's Social Security reform or whatever, tend to be discussed in an almost atomized fashion, as if they're just things out there, independent, standing on their own. I don't think that's helpful.

So if you don't remember anything else I say tonight, you need to ask yourself, “In a sentence, how would you describe the modern world? And what would you like the 21st Century to be like for your children? And how do you think we should go about getting there?” Because otherwise every time you turn on the news at night, it will seem like the political equivalent of Kaos' theory in physics, a bunch of totally unconnected things.

In the three decades or so I spent in public life there were a lot of people who knew more about various things than I did but I always tried to synthesize the information, to take apparently disparate facts and organize them into a pattern that made sense so I could figure out how to get from where we are to where I wanted to go. In a sentence, I believe we are living in by far the most interdependent world in human history, a term I prefer to “globalization,” because it goes way beyond economics and it goes way beyond international relations, that is country-to-country interdependence. We all know we have a globalized economy but we have globalized information technology, globalized culture, tribal technology, the whole nine years.

Furthermore, we are more interdependent across lines that used to divide us, not just among nations but within nations and within communities. Wherever you live chances are that the country you live in and the community you live in is more racially and religiously diverse than it was 20 years ago, and that you're dealing with all different kinds of people than you were 20 years ago.

Now, for most of us this interdependence has been very positive. That's why you can afford to be here and Goldman Sachs can afford to pay me to be here. We did well in this modern world. But interdependence is not by definition positive, it can also be negative. In the United States, 9/11 is the triumph of negative interdependence. It's a brilliant example of an interdependent world, where these guys, most of whom were from Saudi Arabia, all of whom were in al-Qaeda, used easy access to information and technology, easy travel, easy immigration, to turn four jet airplanes into giant chemical weapons. That's what they were. 9/11 was a major chemical weapons attack on the United States and three of the weapons hit home and one died a fortunate death in the woodlands of Pennsylvania thanks to the incredible courage of people who gave up their lives so more Americans wouldn't die, and where other people who were victims of 9/11 were a testament of interdependence. They came from 70 countries, including over 200 other Muslims.

I say that not to get this night started off on a downer but just to make the point that how you see this interdependent world depends very much on the way you see yourself in it and how you see others. The interdependent world that we like is not so good for the 50% of the world that lives on $2.00 a day or less, a billion people living on $1.00 a day or less. A billion people who go to bed hungry tonight, after we had this great meal. A billion and a half people will never get a clean glass of water. One in four people who die this year, from everything, the tsunamis, the wars, the diseases, the heart attacks, the strokes. One in four of all the people who die will die from AIDS, TB, Malaria and infections related to diarrhea, most of them will be little kids that never got a clean glass of water. So for them global interdependence means something very different.
So when you see all those Bolivian miners striking and raising hell and getting down to the third person in line to be President of Bolivia, it's because they think they're on the downside of an interdependent world. They don't feel the same way about it you do and if you lived the way they did and you worked as hard as they were working for as little as they're making, you may not feel that way either.

Now, it seems to me, if you accept that, then the plain mission of people of goodwill all across the world and especially in America with our prosperity and our political and military resources, our mission ought to be to build up the positive and reduce the negative forces of interdependence, to try to move our communities, our country and the world toward a more stable, balanced set of integrated communities. From interdependence to integration requires three things: shared responsibility, shared benefits and shared values.

If you think about all the rebellions just in the last few days, why did France reject the EU Constitution? Why did the Dutch reject it? Because they didn't think it was consistent with their interests or their values and in some cases their identities. You know the people that were campaigning against the French Constitution kept talking about they would be faced with an invasion of Polish plumbers and what they were really worried about was an invasion of Turkish workers in every area.

If you look at Northern Ireland today, where they haven't been able to stand up a government in two years because the Catholics and Protestants can't get along. They have a mixed situation. They have embraced their interdependence enough to get rid of violence forever but they haven't gone far enough to take control of their destiny if they have to do it together.

If you look at the Middle East, we went through seven years of progress toward peace, four years of pure hell and now we're making progress again. But on the bad days and the good days, the Palestinians and the Israelis were equally interdependent because it just simply meant they couldn't escape each other.

Now I could give you lots of other examples, but you get the point. If you believe that we should be moving from interdependence to integrated communities, if you believe in shared responsibilities and benefits and values, how do we go about doing that? And I will try to speak in more shorthand now because I want to leave most of the time for questions.

One, we've got to have a security plan. The first responsibility of every community is to protect its members. And in a national and international sense the two biggest security threats are terror and weapons of mass destruction. Actually in the United States, we're doing reasonably well now in taking down terrorist networks. There were about 20 al Qaeda cells taken down before 9/11, when I was still in office, and we prevented the attempts to take over Bosnia, Albania, blow up targets in the United States and the Middle East around the Millennium and many other things they wanted to do.

Since 9/11, hundreds of people you don't know and will never meet in the United States and around the world have worked on this and have taken down about 30 other al Qaeda cells. They've dramatically weakened the network and they're still capable of killing a lot of people and they still recruited some new people coming out of the conflict of Iraq, but they're weaker than they were. And the ability of your government and governments throughout the world using military, intelligence and law enforcement officials to break up and contain terrorist networks is greater than it was. We're doing a pretty good job of that.

With regard to homeland security, the record is more mixed, partly because, in my view, we haven't spent the money in the right ways. I used to sit around in the White House and ask myself, “If I were Osama bin Laden and I wanted to hurt Americans and kill a bunch of them, what would I do?” And one thing I would try to do is to launch a chemical, biological or nuclear small weapon in one of these hundreds of thousands of containers that comes into America every day in our ports, only 5% of which are checked. Two years ago, there was a security report given to the Congress, which said you don't have to check them all, but there's no detriment effect if you don't check 10 20% of them, and you actually have quite a significant deterrent effect if you do that.

There was a Bill on the floor of the Congress that suggested that the 200,000-- It costs a billion dollars to go from 5-10%, by the way. And the Bill on the floor of the Congress suggested that we go from 5 10%, spend a billion dollars and pay for it by asking me and the 200,000 other people who paid income taxes on over a million dollars that year to give up 5% of our tax cut, which averages $88,000, so it would have taken us down to 83, and it was defeated. The leadership of the House and the administration opposed it because they thought it was, I guess, a slippery slope on the tax cut. But most of us, whether we were conservative, or liberal, or Republican or Democrat, would have gladly given up our five grand to make 300,000,000 Americans and all the others who come to our country more secure. But we need anyway to give a lot of thought to this homeland security because, while we're spending a lot of money, my view is it's not being spent as effective as it could be.

With regard to weapons of mass destruction, the record is more mixed. We're doing quite a good job of working with the Russians to contain not only the nuclear stockpiles in the area and destroy nuclear weapons but also biological and chemical stocks. The Russians still have the largest stocks of biological materials that can be made into weapons in the world. For example, a huge stash of Anthrax was buried on an island off the East Coast of Russia about 12 years ago. A couple of years ago, it was dug up. Half the spores were still alive. That's how dangerous it is.

On the other hand, it's not easy to carry off a biological attack, as you remember. Remember the Anthrax scare, where five Americans were killed and all that Anthrax was sent around? In theory, there was enough Anthrax there to kill 5,000 people I mean 100,000 people, but only five people died. So the biological attacks are the most frightening, but they're also the most difficult to pull off.

The most troubling involve weapons that we haven't seen yet, very small nuclear weapons. If you look at one of the glasses on your table, if you have enough fissile material the size of a cookie, about the size of the top of the glass on your table, you could put it into the fertilizer bomb that Timothy McVeigh used 10 years ago to blow up the Muir Building in Oklahoma City. And just that little bit, if you know how to detonate it, which you can, alas, learn how to do on the Internet, in our interdependent world, it would make a bomb that would blow up 25% of Washington, D.C. So it is very important that we have efforts to control these materials all across the world.

The United States has a very vigorous presence. We've led the world in this. We've done it since. The first Bush administration, one of the last major pieces of legislation the former President Bush signed was something called the Nunn-Luger Bill, a totally bipartisan effort for American to spend money working, in the beginning, only with Russia. And in the beginning, anyone with nuclear weapons to bring all the nuclear weapons from the other Soviet Republics into Russia, control them and then slowly dismantle them and destroy the material. But since then we also

When I was President, we began to work with biological weapons and chemical weapons and there were some used when I served, when your tax dollars, if you're Americans, paid the salaries of one-half (20,000) of the 40,000 Russian scientists and technology workers in the weapons of mass destruction field. We did it so they wouldn't go to work for the bad guys of the world, and it was money very well spent. It wasn't like they didn't do good work. And if you questioned their competence For example, Boeing is using 40-something Russian Aerospace Scientists to design their newest airplane. And that in the computer programming competition among the universities in the world this year, Shanghai University finished first, but second and third went to St. Petersburg and Moscow, so that's a good thing for us not to let those people starve. They ought to be able to make a living. We should be doing more of that. And if the President proposes that or someone in Congress does, you should be for it. It's one thing that we should spend more money. You cannot spend enough money to help the Indians, the Pakistanis, anybody else that has nuclear, chemical or biological stocks, control and if possible destroy them.

But a security policy is not enough. Why? Because if you believe we live in an interdependent world, as the Israelis and Palestinians find out every single day, you cannot possibly kill, jail or occupy all your enemies, so you have to have a security policy. But if you can't kill, jail or occupy all of them, you've got to also have a policy to make more partners and fewer terrorists, which is Prime Minister's Blair Initiative coming up this summer at the G 8 meeting to increase development assistance to the world's poorest countries and to eliminate the debt of the African nations that have responsible governments is a good thing.

We did-- I'll just give you two examples to make the point. In 2000, in the Millennium year, we had a big bipartisan initiative to forgive the debt of the world's poorest countries, hundreds of billions of dollars of it. 27 countries qualified, 23 were African. In addition to that, we, in America, forgave all our bilateral debt to these countries as long as they did the following things. They had to observe basic human rights and put all of the savings into education, healthcare or economic development.

Okay, so here are the two stories to make the point I was making. After I left the White House, I went to Ghana, where have an economic project now. And when I was leaving, I was in the airport walking back to my little plane and this lady starts screaming at me on the tarmac, “Mr. President, Don't go, don't go.” She's waving some package. So she comes running up to me and she says, “You know, you have Debt Relief and the Africa Trade Bill and because of those two things, I am one of 400 women working in my factory making shirts. We have jobs. Our children are in school. We have dignity, and here's your shirt.” I figured, “What the heck? I'm not in office anymore, I took the shirt.” {LAUGHTER} And I took that shirt and I put it in my closet in a place where I look at it. I literally look at this shirt every single day to remind myself that woman is not mad at you. She knows you've got more money than she does, but she thinks you want her to be a part of your future, and she doesn't want her to kid to be a terrorist or fight in one of those tribal wars in Africa.

The second example, when former President Bush and I got back from our tsunami tour, the President invited us to the White House to make a report, and we had quite a report to make about all the heroic work of the American military and the American aid workers and the military and aid workers from other places and the thousands and thousands of people from the non-governmental organizations that went, religious and non-religious, just to help people.

So on the way in, one of our AID workers gave me a poll to take to the President that was completed the day before in Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim country, 200,000,000 people, 95% plus are Muslims. Before this tsunami, the same research firm had done a poll saying that the positive approval of America was 36%; after the tsunami, 60%. Before the tsunami, the positive approval rating of Osama bin Laden, 58%; after the tsunami, 28%. He didn't do anything to them, but he didn't do anything for them. And when you watch your loved ones washed out to sea and you lose everything you had and you have to start all over again? In a stunning moment of insight, a whole country realized that it means a lot more to build a house than to tear one down. It completely changed the view of America, and by the way, all other countries that came to help because we came not with a political agenda, but as human beings to help other human beings, with no thought of any immediate gain.

And I cannot tell you how proud every one of you would have been of the Marines, the Navy personnel, the U.S. government personnel, and then all these people from all these groups that showed up. (I'm going to say more about that in a minute). The point is that aids our security. It makes a better, stronger country.

The third thing we have to do: security, more friends and fewer enemies. The third thing we have to do is build habits and institutions of cooperation. There's a headline story in The New York Times today about a commission headed by George Mitchell and Newt Gingrich recommending changes in the UN. It's a good report. They made good recommendations, but they did it because they know we need a strong UN and they actually made recommendations to make it stronger. They do a lot of good. Now that I'm working for the UN on Tsunami Relief, I can tell you, for example, just there, we're feeding 700,000 people a day. We're feeding all those people in those refugee camps in Darfor and the UN is going a lot to keep children all over the world alive. There was no epidemic outbreak in any of the countries affected by the tsunami in large measure because of international organizations that went there and prevented outbreaks of cholera and dysentery and all the other terrible things that could have happened.

This is one, anyway, where I've really been in a lot of disagreement with President Bush whom I, as the whole world knows now, I like very much, but we have these differences. He and I both agree that we need a World Trade Organization, we should have a free trade area of the Americas. He supported the expansion of NATO, which I cheered, but he believes the United States shouldn't be in the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty or the International Criminal Court or the Kyoto Climate Change Accord, and I disagree. If there was somebody here from the administration, let's say Don Rumsfeld, they could get up here and make a good argument and probably convince you that they were right and I was wrong because they could come up with an example where there those people could make a decision that you would think is bad. But if you only joined organizations because you agreed with every decision made, you wouldn't join better. The World Trade Organization made decisions I thought were nuts when I was President, on occasion, but I never regretted either that we were in it or that I had worked to get China in it. Because I think we were in a rules-based organization that tries to resolve things fairly, that over the long run, we're better off. And it becomes harder to go to war, harder to fight and easier to cooperate.

If you only were in organizations that we agree with every decision, Goldman Sachs wouldn't exist. Lou Holtz never could have kept a football team together. There would be no marriages. There would be-- Let's think about it. So the test has to be something more than, “I won't join unless I agree with every decision they're going to make,” and it's something all of you should debate. So I told some people before I came out today, I understand why the French and the Dutch voted against the EU Constitution but I hope the Europeans will continue to grow together economically and politically, though they will be bigger and richer than America when they do, it'll be a good thing for the world I want, a world of shared responsibilities and benefits and values. It'll be a safer, better world for my daughter and the grandchildren I hope to have. And that's the same reason that I want us to be in these groups.

The third thing we've got to do is to keep making America better. If you want to talk about this in detail, I will. But I think internally, our biggest challenges are the following: We need a dramatic change in energy policy. We need to move away from an imported oil, greenhouse gas based energy economy to a clean-energy energy conservation future. That's where the next generation of high-paying jobs could come from. There could millions of them, if we did it right.

I am delighted that there are some executives who see it that way, most of them are Europeans, Sir John Brown, the head of British Petroleum, the head of Royal Dutch Shell. But recently Jeff Immelt, the new leader of General Electric, said he was going to spend a billion and a half dollars researching new products for a clean-energy future. There is a trillion dollar unmet market today with existing technology that we are not filling because the old energy economy is well-organized, powerful and well financed and the new energy economy is entrepreneurial, disorganized and undercapitalized, but we could change that.

We ought to do something about health care. I'd be glad to talk about that if you want to. But the most encouraging thing there, for the first time since we had a serious debate in 1993, you have business people in the health insurance companies and consumer advocates all talking about trying to do something about it. The fundamental fact is we're spending 15% of our income on health care, nobody else is spending more than 11. Most of our competitors are under that. General Motors just announced they were laying off 25,000 people in America and nobody in Canada, because we're spending $1,800 a car more on health care in America than in Canada. We're spending 4% of our GDP, that's over $400 billion dollars a year more than any other country on earth (about $4,000 a family). Half of it is because of the way we finance health care, through all these different health insurance policies, giving us 34% administrative costs. 34%, nobody else is over 19, compounded with the fact that we don't computerize our records.

The other half can be explained by the fact that we pay more for drugs than anybody else, we have doctors that have to practice defensive medicine because they're afraid they're going to sued and they won't be able to afford their malpractice, or can't get it. We spent more money on the last two months of life than anybody else by far. It's interesting. America's the most religious big country in the world but we have more people who are reluctant to go to heaven than anybody else on Earth. {LAUGHTER} 
And the fifth thing is, we have bad lifestyles. We basically are too fat and too slow. Obesity's going through the roof and it's one reason I'm working on Childhood Obesity Initiative with the American Heart Association. We have, for the first time in the history of America, significant numbers of our children with adult onset diabetes, at a time when diabetes and its related complications already costs you 25% of the Medicaid budget for poor people in America. It's a serious problem, and you can't blame the doctors. You can't blame the health insurance companies. You can't blame anybody except all the rest of us for that. We have to deal with it.

We have an education crisis, which I can summarize in two sentences. From about the 5th grade to the 12th grade, there are public schools in America that have solved every problem but we have totally failed to replicate excellence. We have followed neither the military model of top-down uniform standards, leadership training and accountability or a total competitive model like we have in our colleges and universities. We've been neither fish nor fowl and we've never found a way to replicate excellence. And in our universities, we don't have enough people going and those who do go, we don't have enough studying of math and science and the things that will show up our future.

And we have an economic crisis that I believe is directly the product of deciding to go back to trickle-down economics, which I did my best to get the country off of, which is more about theology than economics and it's a greedy theology. Because it basically says that all tax cuts are good no matter what level you're spending out. I'm an old-fashioned fiscal conservative. I just don't believe that. John Maynard Keynes said we should run deficits in recessions. The President proposed tax cuts in 2001 and 2002. I would have supported even larger temporary tax cuts to stimulate the economy. It turned out most of the stimulus we got out of the Iraq war and the homeland security spending. Most of the tax cut costs were coming later. We have built in large structural permanent deficits again, which we got rid of.

I think it's a terrible mistake. We're financing Bill Clinton's tax cut by going into markets every single day and borrowing money from the Chinese. Now how dumb is that? And we will point the finger and them and say, “You hypocrites. Why don't you raise the value of your currency and be fair in our trading? But please keep loaning me money at low interest rates so I can cover Bill Clinton's tax cut.” I just don't think it's right. I don't think it's good ethnically. I don't think it's good theology and I know it's bad economics. And it's going to lower the standards of living of Americans dramatically in the future if we persist in running chronic deficits when our people already have, individually, quite low savings rates.

Finally, we have to try to find a way to construct a world where we have shared values across all these blizzard of divisions. What in the world could we do? How would you ever do that? And I'll just tell you in a sentence what I think. I think the world's shared values, if you want to have communities, have to be the following: every person counts, deserves a chance, has a responsible role to play. Competition is good but it has to occur within the framework of fairness and cooperation. Our differences are very important but our common humanity matters more. Now the only thing you have to do to get those values accepted is to reject fundamentalism in all its forms. In all its religious and political forms, you'll find that the ability of one person or one group to be in possession of the absolute truth. You don't have to deny that there is an absolute truth, you just have to deny that anybody's smart enough to have it all and to turn it into a political program and impose it on everybody else. That is the only prerequisite for building a world that we can all live in.

On balance, I am quite optimistic for three reasons. In the 1990's, these three things happened, and I didn't have anything to do with any of them so I can brag on them, except to push them along a little bit.

In the 1990's, for the first time in history, more people lived under democracies than dictatorships making change more possible. In the 1990's, the Internet exploded and became an independent force for the public good potentially for all the bad things on it.

Now a classic example is the SARS epidemic. We all remember the horrible things that happened to the Chinese young people that took to the streets in Tiananmen Square. But when the SARS epidemic exploded early in this decade, the Chinese government denied that it was happening. Then the cases spread from rural China to Hong Kong and it got out and then all of a sudden they were in Toronto and there was an explosive revolt of Chinese young people, not in Tiananmen Square but by the tens of thousands on the Internet. They jammed all sites. They demanded the government to tell the truth. They turned around and cooperation ensued and what could have killed hundreds of thousands of people was shut down almost overnight because of the Internet. Americans gave $1.4 billion dollars to Tsunami Relief, half the households in America. I mean 30% of the households in America contributed, 30%, over half of them over the Internet.

The third thing that happened is the growth of the Non-Governmental Organizations. Lloyd was kind enough to tell you about some of the things I do. I started two years ago with nothing, three years ago, and I wanted to something about AIDS because it made me mad there were over 6,000,000 people at death's door in the poor countries not getting this medicine and we get it automatically in America, whether we're rich or poor, at about $10,000 a person a year. And then with generic medicine developed at about $500 a persona year. So I went to work on it and 2 1/2 years later, we're serving 110,000 people and we now only pay $180 a year for the medicine and the testing, just in my little Foundation.
Bill Gates has spent a billion dollars in India and Africa on health care and $250,000,000 on education in America. He's the biggest non-governmental organization. But I just came from Tamil Nadu in India, where widows of fishermen and women who fished who lost their boats have been taught by a small non-governmental organization how to do crafts work. And they're selling their crafts and they're going to make twice as money as they ever did fishing.

All over the world there are thousands of these group and that's changed life for you and me. People like us used to go to meetings like this and we would all sit around talk about what the government should do and that's a very important thing and it's still a legitimate question. But you can't ever come to a meeting like this again and ask that, without also asking, “What can I do about something I care about?”

When the UN opens in September, I'm going to have a meeting called the “Clinton Global Initiative” where a lot of world leaders are going to come, a lot of Republicans and Democrats in America are going to come. We have about 1,000 business people. We hope to limit it to that. I tell everybody this is going to smaller and cheaper than Davos but it will be much more expensive in one way. You can't come to my meeting and discuss those four subjects unless at the end, you promise in writing to take some specific action to make one of those four problems better. And I figure if we have 1,000 people meeting for 10 years, we can really change the world and make it a better place.

So that's why, on balance, I'm optimistic. I can draw all the doomsday scenarios you want, but on balance, I think we'll do the right thing. For those of you who are not from America and you worry about us, don't ever forget what Winston Churchill said in the darkest days of World War II. When people tried to bait him The press repeatedly baited him because America wasn't in the war. Roosevelt was having to sneak around to get him help and he said, “Aren't you worried about America? Aren't you worried about America?” And Churchill said, “The United States of America invariably does the right thing, after exhausting every other alternative.” {LAUGHTER} It's going to be all right, if we do the right thing. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
