{title} Partial Transcript: President Clinton Remarks to Deutsche Bank {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} May 4, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} This is an excerpt. {/description}

{speech} 

... if we don't do anything until the government approves a plan, and then we go in to try to make sure we've got the trained personnel before we just shoot the medicine in. We negotiated agreements with the major Indian and South African drug manufacturers for generic antiretrovirals at $139 a person a year. I believe it's the cheapest price available on earth and then a lot of the major producers of the equipment for testing (which you have to do in order to know whether the medicine is working or not) agreed with us to cut the price in the aggregate to $60 a year for the CD4 and viral load test, as opposed to $400-$600, which is what most people are playing. So we can do the whole load now for $200 a person a year.

Just with our little Foundation— Oh, in addition to that, 30 other countries have been certified by the World Health Organization as having sufficient medical capacity to buy drugs off our contract. So this year, in January, 110,000 more people were getting medicine, in all these countries that were getting them 2 1/2 years ago, just under our efforts. And so that's 110 plus 130, that's 240. And thanks to the work of, the funding that is now beginning to be spent by the Bush administration, the global funds efforts (Doctors Without Borders and others), we probably have a total of 500,000 people over and above what were getting the medicine two years ago, but we're still at nearly That if you do math, it means we still got well over 5 1/2 million people whose very lives depend upon getting care and treatment not now available.

So this last couple of weeks, we've announced an initiative to try to develop greater care networks in rural areas. And Paul Farmer, who many of you know, a remarkable man who has spent his life bringing healthcare to rural Haiti, a medical professor from the Boston area, who's married a Haitian woman and spends 5 or 6 months a year in a thatched hut in Haiti, serving an area that was supposed to be 20,000 and people from an area of 200,000 to get care. He's really the Albert Schweitzer of our age, I think, in Hemisphere. But he agreed to go into Rwanda with me, which is a small country (about 8,000,000 people) and try to set up rural healthcare networks and then replicate that throughout the rest of the world.

And we finally got enough money together to provide pediatric antiretrovirals to 10,000 kids. Now that is nothing and everything. Let me tell you how bad the numbers are. Last year, half a million preteens died of AIDS, and in the whole world 25,000 are getting any antiretrovirals. Of those 25,000, more than half are in two countries, Brazil and Thailand, which also has a pharmaceutical industry, and gives them to the affected kids. So basically we have now doubled the number of-- We will, this year, double the number of children getting this medicine, outside Brazil and Thailand. And next year, we'll go from 10 to 60,000, which will have an exponential affect. So the good news is, a lot of this is happening and hopefully will happen as more and more American and other pharmaceutical companies provide the medicine at lower costs, as the Bush administration money flows in, as the global fund begins to be funded.

The bad news is, this is nuts. This is a disease, a viral epidemic that is (A) a 100% preventable; (B) there's medicine that almost 100% of the time prevents transmission from affected mothers to their children; C) there's medicine that keeps nearly everybody alive, who's reasonably healthy when they start taking it, and people are still dying like flies. It is the most frustrating thing I have ever dealt with in my life. And I'm glad we've had a significant impact, but we've got a long way to go. We estimate that just with our Foundation, within about two years, we could be up to 2,000,000 people getting the medicine.

So if we all got in gear-- If everybody did-- It's not so much an issue now as it is how we spend the money and whether the institutional changes can be affected in a lot of these rural areas to get it done. But it's been what's the most rewarding and the most frustrating thing I think I've ever done.

But when you see it-- I saw a kid, a 16-year-old kid, who stood with me in the Bahamas. And the last time I saw him, he was barely up to my waist. His growth was so stunted and I was sure he was going to die. And he's going to live now. He'll never be as big as he would have, but he's going to have a life.

The Haitian woman who runs the counter at the local drug store where I get my medicine has a niece who's HIV positive in Haiti and when we started there, she was 13 years old and so weak that she had to be taken by cab to school and then literally carried to her desk and sat down, because she could not stand and walk. She just sent me a picture of herself in her prom dress. A beautiful 16-year-old girl, looking like my daughter did when she was 16. This is work worth doing and these people don't need to die. And whatever everybody's concern is about all this other stuff, nothing matters compared to trying to keep them alive in every continent.

I sat with a young woman from China who was HIV positive and wept because she had a baby before she knew she was HIV positive and her baby died. She was infected because she was one of these poor village women who lived in one of those rural villages in China where there are no jobs. That's why everybody is moving to the coastal cities. And she thought she could improve her, and her husband and the children she wanted to have, their situation by going to college and the only way she could make any money going to college was by donating blood. Because rural people were donating blood for the hospitals in the cities because the blood banks couldn't keep up with the population growth. And the equipment was contaminated, just as it was in America over 20 years ago.

A friend of mine's mother died of AIDS because she gave blood through contaminated equipment in this country, over 20 years ago. And this woman was weeping about the lost of her child. And she was getting antiretrovirals that a Chinese doctor who'd once worked at the CDC just wheedled out of some friends of hers at one of our pharmaceutical companies in America. But they'd run out of testing money, so they no longer had any idea whether the medication was working. This is a situation that is nuts and unacceptable and we need to do more to correct it and more quickly.

The other thing I announced yesterday, that everybody's been making fun of my long-time penchant for McDonald's fried food, {LAUGHTER} {COMMENT="Few laughs"} is this effort, “that the boy doesn't want to get obesity.” Childhood obesity has tripled in America over the last 20 years. It's 16% nationwide. It's 20% in the South, where I grew up, and we live on fried food. And the basic causes are clear. At the very most, exercise levels have not gone up among children. In most places they've gone down, as schools have dropped their physical education programs, middle and upper middle-class suburbs have been built without sidewalks. A lot of these people, families are struggling to work. 47% of the food dollar is spent eating out now, as opposed to 30% in 1970. Over half of that is spent on people driving to fast-food establishments. This is a function of working people having to work. And you get good value for dollar, in terms of being filled up, and food's still a great bargain in America. But the nature of the food that we eat, not only have the portions gotten bigger but there's more fat and more sugar in what we're eating. And it's not just McDonald's.

The school lunch menus in many places are a disgrace from a nutritional point of view. They were published— The last time I was home in Arkansas, a couple of weeks ago, just coincidentally, I happened to be there on a day when there was an article about this problem, and they published the school lunches on that day from some of the major schools. It was unbelievable, unbelievable. Half of all the vegetables consumed by people between the ages of 2 and 19 are potatoes. The literal percentage, I think, is 46-47%. And you know, I'm Irish. I like potatoes. The vending machines, which sadly, a lot of vending machine companies, you know, pay funds and help to fund local PTA's and stuff like that, but they're full of stuff kids shouldn't be eating.

And it's not just what you eat. A lot of the things, you could go on and eat if we prepared them in a different way. This is something that I agreed to do with the Heart Association, kind of coming out of my, my sense of obligation. Because I survived and dodged the big bullet and I had wonderful healthcare. And because I think most of the changes we need to make here are lifestyle changes. We are going to have to have help from the food manufacturers and from the restaurant chains and from the schools.

I visited a school in the north of Harlem yesterday, in Washington Heights, that has an exercise program and drastically altered their school menu. And the kids in the first grade were writing essays to me, when I got there yesterday, about the health focus of their school now, and why they changed and why it was good. We can do this.
But let me just tell you how bad this in. You know, I know there's been this big argument because the CDC has to revise now, the number of people that died of obesity and so a lot of the food companies have jumped on that and said we're all crying wolf. Forget about that. That's people my age, who grew up at an age when the childhood obesity rate was something like 5 or 6%.

We now have, for the first time in American history, substantial numbers of children with what most of us call “adult onset diabetes.” About 25% of the Medicaid budget is tied to diabetes. After I was elected, but before I was inaugurated President, the man who was the Chairman of my first campaign for Congress in 1974, who was only a year older than me, died of diabetes.

My Chief of Staff in the White House, Erstine Bowles, two of his children had diabetes, inherited. But I've lived with this and worked with this a lot. If you can start having a bunch of kids who didn't have to have diabetes, with adult onset diabetes, I tell you, you've got a serious problem on your hands. And I've partnered in this to make it totally nonpartisan, with a Republican Governor of my native State, Mike Huckerby, who two years ago weighed 280 pounds and is about 5'9-10. He's never taken any physical exercise in his life and he's a Baptist Minister and realized that he was a poor role model. So he lost 110 pounds in a year and a few months ago, he ran a marathon at 49. He's a very articulate man and he's written a book that will be published next week called Stop Digging Your Own Grave With a Knife and Fork. {COMMENT="He laughs"} It's pretty funny.

I want to say more about this again in the context of general healthcare. But you know, you hardly see anybody talk about the healthcare crisis in America and say that Americans could take far fewer demands on the system if they made different lifestyle choices and if we did it in a systematic way. So I'm going to try to do that. I think it's a big deal.

Now let me just make a couple of observations about healthcare and then I'll open the floor to questions. When I became President, we were spending almost 14% of our GDP on healthcare. Today, we're spending over 15%. The next nearest countries to us are Canada and Switzerland. They have different systems, but they're somewhere between 10-11%. Now in addition to that, there are 4,000,000 more people without health insurance today than there were the day I left office. We had finally gotten with a lot of the things that we did (and I didn't mention them all), but we've finally gotten the number of people without insurance down by 1997, for the first time since 1987. A lot of that was the improving economy, more employers could afford to offer health insurance. But the lion's share of the numbers were the children we were insuring.
I tried to pass a Bill through Congress that would have helped a lot of companies, by the way, that would of allowed people who retire early at 55, and lose their health insurance. And now, only about 1 in 7 or 8 early retirees have any carryover health insurance from their employer. I tried to pass a Bill that would allow those people to buy into the Medicare program, on a sliding-scale income-based basis, but it didn't prevail. So now we have more people uninsured. We're over 15% of GDP. What are the causes of this? What are the differences in our systems and others, that are arguably unrelated to the quality of care?

I think there are at least five, that I think we ought to, that we have to start looking at. First, is the administrative costs. The paperwork burden of our system is massively greater than any other system on earth. We have a strong preference in our country for a private sector solutions and competition and the more competitors, the better, and in most cases, that's right. In this case, it's lead to the employment of 2 3,000,000 people in administrative jobs in health insurance companies and health providers, whose main job is either try to get the money or try to keep from giving it a little longer and catch the float. And as a result of that, when we had this crazy-quilt pattern of health insurance policies, which don't have standardized benefit packages, where people argue over what's covered and what's not, whether you can lose it and whether you can't. None of it has very much to do with the delivery of healthcare, all of it adds the cost of the healthcare system.

Let me just give you a few numbers. The administrative costs now, in the private sector, according to the latest figures I've gotten, is 15%, the administrative costs of Medicare. Medicaid is less than 4%. The aggregate paperwork costs, when you count what the doctors and the others have to spend is 34% of our system. No other country approaches 20%. Canada's the highest I've found at 19. But 15%-- That is the difference of 19 and 34 is 15%. 15% of 15% of GDP is over 2% of GDP. Just run those numbers in your head. You know, even for some of you, that's real money. {LAUGHTER} 

So what can we do about it? Since obviously we're not going to do what I tried to do. What can we do? Well, the first thing we ought to do is to computerize medical records and have uniform systems and every time you go into a health care provider, you should add to it or modify it, instead of having to reinvent the wheel all over again. It would cost about $100 $150,000,000,000 in one-time costs, it would be worth it.

I could give you a personal example, where I just added to the cost of the healthcare system. Hillary insisted that I stop going to the dentist I was going to and go see her dentist, because she thought that he was great and I had a chipped tooth. And he was great and it was fascinating. I enjoyed it. But because I'd never been there before, they sat me down and took out one of these damn forms and asked me if I'd ever had measles and all that stuff they ask you. And I'm 58 years old. I couldn't even remember the answer to some of those questions. I'm not sure I gave the same answers I did three years ago. {LAUGHTER} You know, but I added lots to the cost of the healthcare system. I sat there for half an hour and answered all those stupid questions. And they were sensible questions if they were going to give me, you know, a certain kind of medication to put me to sleep for the dental work and all that. But I answered all those questions, that I've answered a zillion times before and I'm almost certain I didn't give the same answers. And this happens over and over and over again. Every time, you have to do it. And it's almost dangerous. When people have emergency situations, where do you go to get the information?

Now we've always been reluctant to do this in our country because of our privacy concerns, I get that. But I believe 90% of the American people, if they were presented with the alternatives and they understood what a burden this was presenting to the system. That you were getting more costs, worse information and undermining the quality and speed of care, would choose to have computerized records with as much privacy protection as we could provide. And we'd create a market for smart people to figure out how to have that privacy protection. I think that's important.

The second thing I think would really help is, even though it would be resisted, I think, by some of the health insurance industry, is we could cut the administrative costs dramatically if we had more standardized benefit package and bigger pools. I mean I could get— You know, a lot of you know these nightmare stories, but man, if you get stuck in a small pool and you—

I'll never forget this guy that was going to work for a nonprofit with 20 employees and they were in a little, small business pool. All he ever wanted to do was work for the non-profit and he had his whole family insured. And somebody else in the non-profit had a child with a severe illness that was going to cost like a quarter of a million dollars to treat. And they were all told that if they didn't fire this person, that everybody else's premium was going to go up 20%. Now that don't make any sense and it only happened because they had a small, small pool. And the administrative costs would go down dramatically if you had a standardized package. Even if there were a lot of items on the list. If you look at the Federal Employee Benefit Plan, for example, there are more than-- I can't remember because I'm not on it anymore directly, but I think there were more than two dozen options we had, but still, you could manage two dozen. You can computerize two dozen. You can standardize the way you handle it. It would substantially cut the cost of paperwork.

The second thing we spend a lot more money on than anything else is drugs, and I want to talk about that and say what I'm not for. We are the only major country, including the major European producers of pharmaceuticals that have no price limits on what can be charged for pharmaceuticals, in return for the patent and the monopoly you get. I actually don't favor changing that. We have a vigorous pharmaceutical industry. They've done a lot of good for America and for the world, I think we ought to leave it there. But we don't need to make it worse, and we don't need to pretend that there aren't some problems there.

On the average, the last five years, the return on sales has been about 18%. Wal Mart makes about 6, the average of Fortune 500 companies about 3. 15% has been spent on research and development; 31% has been spent on marketing and administration. 68% of the new drugs that have been brought to market in the last decade have been brought to market as a result of government funding through the NIH or university discoveries with NIH funding. Then they're licensed to the companies. We don't have to go to price controls, and I would even favor a larger R&D tax credit for real work, especially from new companies and biotech companies. But we do really dumb things. I think this Medicare Drug Bill was an abomination and I think it ought to be repealed. First of all, the Congress was not told the truth about what it cost. They knew it was going to cost $5.50 billion dollars and they allowed the Congress to vote on it at $400,000,000,000. At least $200,000,000,000 of that is an unjustified subsidiary in prices because they will not let Medicare negotiate the way General Motors, or the Veteran's Administration, or any other large purchaser of drugs can negotiate so they both made buying from Canada illegal. Drugs made in America, certified by the FDA, certified by the Canadians, that's a crime now, and you can't bargain for lower prices. It's just an unconscionable subsidy that has added to the financial woes of Medicare. There's also a huge subsidies in there to corporations to keep on doing what they were doing before, which is providing drug benefits as a part of their health coverage. I just think it's a mistake. We can't afford it. Look at the deficit. Look at what we've got to do, and it adds to the cost of healthcare without adding to the quality of care. And I think we have to look at that.

I think we have to look at the FDA approval system and ask whether it's a good idea to approve a new drug if it has no advance over an already-approved drug. I think we ought to encourage the use of the pharmaceuticals where the patent's expired unless the new drug, that's in competition with it, is actually better. You know, I know I'm going to be old-fashioned here. I don't think this'll ever be done. But you know, most of the TV advertisements I see are for new drugs and the last 10 seconds are all the warnings. It's the most bizarre thing I've ever seen. I don't know that we're better off. It might have been better just to have the Pharmaceutical Reps go to see the doctors, the way they used to, and let people do what they were doing. You know, since a lot of them are products directed at men my age, I ought to be for the TV ads, but I don't know. {LAUGHTER} I just question whether this whole thing is a wise allocation of limited national resources on healthcare and whether it's necessary to maintain financially profitable companies.

As I said, I have no problem I don't think we should go to price-fixing, like every other country does. I don't think we ought to I think we ought to, if anything, increase the research and development tax credit. But I think the FDA permitting processes adds to the price of drugs without adding to the quality of healthcare the way it does, and I believe that the Medicare Drug Bill was an abomination, especially in a country with a big deficit like we've got. It's just not right.

The third big issue we've got is we spend more money on the last two months of life than any other country in the world. That's a cultural thing. We may not be able to do anything about that. You saw that in this debate over the Schiavo case, and whatever side you were on, everybody was You had to admit that there were some arguments on the other side that were somewhat appealing. I thought it was a hard case. I favored letting the exhausting law and the process and the doctors that were on the ground and the people that reviewed it and the family members work it out, but it was a hard case. And part of the reason it's a hard case is, we just don't give up as easy as people do in a lot countries. We just hang on till the last drop and I kind of admire that in a way, for all kinds of reasons.

But I do believe that the debate in the Schiavo case will lead to a huge increase in the number of Living Wills. We're two for two in my family, because of it. And I think the more of those we have, the more it will help us to moderate future expenses, future end of life expenses without undermining the quality of care or the sanctity of life or the integrity of families. But I don't think you can blame the insurance companies, the doctors, the hospitals or anybody else. It's a part of our culture. They're unresolved questions. There are personal decisions that have to be made and I really believe that before we look at other things and other kind of decisions, we really ought to push this whole Living Will thing much harder than it's pushed so far.

The fourth thing that happens is there is a lot of defensive medicine practice because of the size of the malpractice premiums and the fear of lawsuits. My daughter had a very close friend at Stanford, who is a Columbia Medical student now. So when I was up there laid up in the hospital, she'd come and see me. She said she'd really like to be a pediatrician and we need more but she can't afford the malpractice premium.

I was talking to a doctor, who's the Administrator of one of the big medical complexes in Houston, who said that when they began to self-insure their doctors, they cut their malpractice premiums by 90%. But again, for a doctor base, he had a very large pool. So I think that the government ought to look at ways to facilitate the formation of very large pools of physicians with good safety records that can either self-insure or get good moderate costs. Because malpractice is kind of like crime. An enormous percentage of violent crimes in this country are committed by a very small percentage of the criminals. An enormous percentage of the big malpractice problems in the country are attributable to a very tiny percentage of the doctors. But we penalize every young person that gets out of medical school, who wants to be a pediatrician, for it. So some sort tort reform may be warranted and I'm not against that, as long as we don't cut off the right to sue of people who are genuinely injured by genuinely negligent people. But I think we can do a lot to change the market to lower malpractice costs for doctors and it would make a huge difference.

Finally, there's, where I started this talk, there are the lifestyle issues. You know, we can eat ourselves into the grave if we want to. But we're kidding ourselves if we don't think that (1) we're running the risk of this generation of kids being the first one to live shorter lives than their parents; (2) we're running the risk that my generation, the baby-boomers, are going to be unconscionably expensive for our children and grandchildren to take care of because of lifestyle choices we made. With people over 85 being the fastest-growing group in America, percentage wise.

We need more people like my stepfather, whose 90th birthday, I just celebrated. And he can hardly get around now because he just broke his leg, almost at the hip. But he played golf with me into his late 80's and if I gave him his handicap, he'd beat me half the time. And he just kind of kept going.

We need to really do a huge cultural effort here, through all of our institutions to make people understand the importance of physical and mental activity. The Medical Journal article, three years ago said, you decrease your chances of Alzheimer's by 50% when you're over 45 if you do a crossword puzzle or a set of math problems everyday. So I did my crossword puzzle on the way down here today. {LAUGHTER} Some people think it's too late for me, but I'm trying anyway. {LAUGHTER} 

But this is a huge problem. I've got a friend my age with an older brother, two years older, who's a career Navy guy. I really like this guy, his brother. And he can still play par golf but at the end of the hole, he can't remember the clubs he used or the score he made. And he's so fit, he's probably going to live a long time with this. So that's important for medical research for the development of new therapies. But it's also important, if there are any lifestyle changes we can make to reduce the number of people that have mental, as well as physical disabilities, we have to do that. And we can't sit around and blame the drug companies, the doctors, the hospitals, the insurance companies and everybody else for the collective lifestyle choices we made when we know we're going to be living longer and we know what we can do that will change the dynamics of that.

So for whatever it's worth, I think we've got to deal with paperwork, pharmaceuticals, end of life, defensive medicine and lifestyles. That's the sort of low-hanging fruit. And I think over time, we can still have more high-tech medicine, more advanced drugs, more quality specialists and still close the gap between what we're spending and what everybody else is spending.

Now you have to see this in the context of the problems that your government has helping you today. We have a deficit that's reported of about $400 billion dollars. It's actually more than that. It's about $550 billion dollars because we the first $150 billion dollars' worth of debt and pay for it with surplus Social Security taxes every year. We buy the bonds, and it's fine but some day those bonds will have to be redeemed, and unless we change the economics, that will mean that the debt payments of the country will go up exponentially at some point in the future.

Look, I was-- I will make full disclosure. I was opposed to the 2001 tax cut, the 2002 tax cut, the 2003 tax cut and the 2004 tax cut, and I'm opposed to the one in this year's budget. I was against them. I would have supported a larger tax cut in 2001 if it had had a two-year time limit to stimulate the economy. The tax cut really didn't cost much in 2001. It was enacted in 2001. It cost a whole lot later on down the road. But as a result, a series of tax cuts, almost half of the benefits of which went to people in the top 1% of the income groups. The first of which was adopted before we knew what our income, our expenses, or our emergencies were going to be. Then we had 9/11, we had a big emergency. Right? And we have a little recession, so our income goes down and our expenses go up. We made a mistake.

But in 2002, 2003, 20004, we knew we had more spending. We knew we had less revenues and we just kept on digging, because of an ideological economic theory that has no evidentiary support. And I frankly think it did terrible things to the ethical fabric of this community. And I'll just close with this one example. Because this is why your government is hurting to help you, with this huge deficit.

I mean, everyday we go into the markets and we ask the Chinese government to loan the American government money to pay Bill Clinton's tax cut. That's what happens. We're the only country in the world that thinks that countries poorer than us should loan us money to pay rich people like me, the richest people in America, tax cuts. We have never cut taxes in a time of war before. We've been on a war footing with the terror deal, the homeland security expenses and the Iraq thing. We have never done this before, ever, in our whole history. We not only cut it, we went and borrowed money from poor countries to give me a tax cut.

I'll just give you one example. This is off the healthcare subject but it's important for what kind of country we are. I went to college at Georgetown. I roomed for four years with an Irish Catholic from Long Island, whose father was a local Judge, elected on the conservative ticket, because every Republican he knew (but Barry Goldwater) was too liberal for him. It would be hard to imagine two people that were more different politically. I show up in 1964, and he's got a GOLDWATER FOR PRESIDENT sticker on the door. I said, “Heck, that's what I left Arkansas to get away from.” {COMMENT="He laughs"} And we became like brothers. And interesting enough, as we got older, our politics grew together.

So he graduates from college and he joins the Marine Corp in the Vietnam era, and he's a Marine Pilot. Then he becomes a commercial pilot. He marries a wonderful Irish Catholic woman, has to beautiful Irish Catholic boys. The woman's sister's family disintegrates and they take her sister's daughter, who had Cerebral Palsy, and they raise her as their own child. And while they're doing that, they take every available weekend and go to Mexico and build houses for poor people. These people are Saintly people. Religious, old-fashioned, conservative, wonderful people.

So I get in the White House and he calls me one day, when the Republicans won the Congress, which made him happy. He voted me just because he'd known me all his life. {LAUGHTER} And he said, “Bill, I just saw this budget.” He said, “You know, my daughter's best friend has Cerebral Palsy. Her mother is a single mom working at a minimum wage job, riding a bus to work one hour a day.” And these kids with Cerebral Palsy have to have four or five pairs of really expensive shoes a year.” He said, “Now if I read this budget right, that I got from the Cerebral Palsy Association, they're going to give me a tax cut.” He was a pilot, earning about $100,000 a year. He said, “They're going to give me a tax cut and they're going to cut the subsidy this family gets to buy the shoes and the subsidy she gets to ride the bus to work, and they won't raise her minimum wage.” I said, “That's right.” He said, “Bill, you've got to kill that. That's immoral.” A conservative Republican, who had lived in the world we live in. So I killed it and we became friends and we started this dialogue.

Okay. So his oldest son goes in the Marine Corp. and I take the younger son to Camp Lejeune at Christmastime and he falls in love with the Marine Corp. He cuts his hair, takes the earring out of his ear, and he becomes a Marine Corp. officer. Then we have 9/11. Both of these boys are sent into harm's way, Afghanistan or Iraq. This guy, I've loved like a brother all my life, his kids are risking their lives for you and me. Meanwhile, I'm making speeches to folks like you. It's almost a form of white collar crime {LAUGHTER} {COMMENT="Few laughs"} and I'm getting rich. And I could only have had the life I've had in America. I never made a nickel to my name until I got out of politics.

And what did my country to do in the war against terror, to support this man I love's sons, that I've known since they were infants, who were risking their lives for the things I believe in. What was I asked to do? Not one thing, except open four envelopes containing four big tax cuts. I don't think an ethical society would do that. And now we have Medicare about to go broke in just a few years. It's in much worse shape than Social Security. The assumptions for Social Security are actually better than they were than when I left office, and I left enough money in the surplus to take the interest savings on the debt to take it out to 2061 on today's assumptions. If you increased immigration, legal immigration by a quarter of a million a year, you'd solve the Social Security problem, the solvency issue. Whether you believe in private accounts, that's a philosophical thing. But the solvency issue, you could solve it easily. Medicare is the problem. It's the next big ugly part of this healthcare issue.

I believe that before we can ever solve any of these problems, we have to take a hard look at ourselves and ask ourselves, both as citizens, people like me that can pay the taxes, in terms of our living habits and everything else, “What are our options here?” And “Are we prepared to look at the long run and not just the short one?” Great societies endure because at critical moments, there's always enough people willing to look at the long run. I don't think this increase in the GDP going to healthcare is sustainable. I don't think the deficit's sustainable. I don't think we can lead the world unless we continue to improve America. So I think the healthcare issue is all caught up with all these others. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
