{title} Remarks at Compuware Event {/title}
{event} Remarks at Compuware Event {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} May 10, 2002 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you and good morning. When I got my little notes on this event, they said I was supposed to wear business attire and I think for Southern California, you did. {LAUGHTER} So if you don't mind, at least I'll loosen my tie, because I drove down here through the traffic today. I am delighted to be here and I guess I should start by congratulating you, Pete, on the victory in the hockey game last night. {APPLAUSE} Pete said when McCain scored in overtime and won the game, he was told there was a deathly silence in the Mulson Center in Montreal. I don't know how many of you have ever seen a hockey game in Canada, but it's right up there with religion to them. {LAUGHTER} So this is good. The Prime Minister of Canada is a very close friend of mine. I don't know if I can resist the temptation to call him today or not.

I want to thank all of you for the work you do and for giving me a chance to come to this beautiful place today. This company has been involved with the information technology revolution for nearly 30 years now. Your mission is to help people do more and do it better, but you have been at the center of one of the most remarkable developments in all human history. A handheld computer now has more power than the system that took Neil Armstrong to the moon in 1969.

When I became President, believe it or not, there were only This is January of '93. That's hardly in the dark ages, even for you young people who are here. When I became President, there were only 50 50 sites on the World Wide Web. The Internet, in January of '93 was still largely the private province of information scientists.

The first email was sent about 20 years ago by Vince Serf to his then profoundly deaf wife. In 1999, we had, my wife sponsored an event at the White House, in early 2000, as a part of the Millennia Lecture Series on the intersection of the biological sciences and information technology. Vince Serf showed up again and talked about the computer side of the equation with Dr. Lander from Harvard, who talked about Genomics and he introduced his wife and explained that he thought about doing email because she was profoundly deaf. They didn't have those new phones that work or people who can't hear and he worried about her being at home while he was at work. She then got up and gave a talk and explained that she had just had a digital chip implanted deep in her canal and she could hear for the first time in 50 years. She had just come from a James Taylor concert and said she was quite certain she was the only person on the face of the earth who had not heard him sing “Fire and Rain” until the year 2000.

In the near future, the development of nanotechnology will have a radical effect on diagnostic healthcare, enabling us to identify cancerous tumors when they're only a few cells in size, raising the prospect that almost all cancers will be curable. Not very long ago, a man in Arizona, who was paralyzed walked 1,000 feet with the aid of a digital chip planted in his spinal cord, giving regular beats which reduced the effort to walk by something like 8 times. Just beyond the near future, who knows? Ray Kurtzweil in his book, The Age of Spiritual Machines, says in a couple of decades, computers will be thinking better than we do, which will either relieve us of an enormous burden or impose a whole new set, probably some of both.

Now, I want to thank you for what you have done in effecting your part of this revolution and specifically, I want to thank this company for the work you did when I was President to help us meet the Y2K challenge. Everyone thought the sky would fall and it didn't. I want to thank you for the work you do for the Library of Congress. The Library of Congress is a very special place to me from the time since I was a young man and I tried to do my part to take care of it when I was President. When we signed the Telecommunications Act in 1996, we actually did it at the Library of Congress. It began when Thomas Jefferson sold his personal library of just under 6,500 books to the library after the British troops had burned all the books in the War of 1812. Today there are 17 million books and 111 million other documents there. Back then, when Thomas Jefferson gave his books to the library, every single one of them was meticulously recorded in pen, in ink. Today, thanks to Compuwear, they somehow keep track of all 17 million books and 111 million documents.

I also want to thank you, Pete, for the work you and your company have done for the city of Detroit, a place I love very much. Mayor Archer, I know is a member of your Board, along with another former colleague of mine, Lowell Weicker. We're a long way from Detroit and you've got people here from all around the world, but we all know the world is becoming increasingly urbanized in cities that work and make a huge difference compared to the cities that don't. In the 1990's, the unemployment rate in Detroit was cut by more than 50%, thanks, I hope, to some of the things that I did with the Mayor (the Empowerment Zone, the Cops Program, the Education and Housing Initiatives), but thanks also to a lot of what you did.

The world has been dominated lately by mostly bad news. I think it is worth starting with some of the good things that have happened since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. You mentioned the economic progress that America enjoyed, but in the last 20 years as the economy has become more globalized, all across the world more people have been lifted out of poverty than at any comparable time in all human history. For the first time in history, in the 1990's, the majority of the world's people lived under governments that they voted in themselves. Relationships between the United States and our two great adversaries of the cold war, Russia and China, turned from confrontation to cooperation. The world joined together to end ethnic cleansing in the Balkans. We saw peace in Northern Ireland, resolving 600 years of conflict, 30 years of it marking terrorism in our lifetime. And in spite of the trouble there today, it's worth remembering that we had 7 years of progress and peace in the Middle East.

We brought into being, the World Trade Organization and made China a part of it. Latin American and North American leaders committed to build a free trade area of the Americas. The leaders of the major countries in the Asia-Pacific region, on both sides of the Pacific began to meet every year for the first time and committed themselves to a free trade area there. America opened its markets to countries from Africa and the Caribbean, poor countries that chose openness through trade and investment, as opposed to closed economic development grew at 5% a year; those that stayed away from the global economy grew at 1%.

We began to cooperate in interesting ways with our former adversaries expanding NATO to include former communist countries, having partnerships with Russia. We spent over half the money the world spent in America to clean up landmines, a terrible problem, passed the chemical weapons convention to try to reduce the chances that your children will ever be subject to chemical warfare. America agreed in that time to a comprehensive test band treaty on nuclear weapons, to do its part to stop global warming, to try to build an international criminal justice system with a criminal court.

In spite of all the problems in the world, infant mortality was down and life expectancy was up. And as I already said, there were breathtaking biomedical discoveries, the most important of which was the sequencing of the human genome. Parenthetically, another advance that would have been completely impossible had it not been for the digital chip and the revolution in information technology. There are a lot of younger women here. Those of you still in your childbearing years, in all probability within 5 years, maybe as long as 10, but I think 5 is closer to it. In all countries with good health systems, young women will begin to come home from the hospital with their babies with a little “gene card” and it will say, “Here's the good news. Here's the bad news, but if you do the following 10 things, you can minimize the bad news.” When that happens, children's life expectancy will soon shoot well above 90 years. So a lot of good things have happened in the world. Then came September the 11th and then the horrible resumption of violence in the Middle East, which is the home of the world's three great monotheistic religions.

So here's what I want to ask you today to think about. What does the success of Compuwear, as compared with what happened here on September the 11th, tell us about the modern world? What does the peace in Northern Ireland, as compared with the resumption of war and terror in the Middle East tell us about the modern world? I believe it tells us that we live in a world that is completely interdependent but far from integrated.

On September the 11th, the al Qaeda terrorists used our interdependence. We had built a world without walls. We've torn down barriers, collapsed distances, spread information and technology. So what did they do? They used open borders, free travel, access to information and technology to murder 3,100 people. In the Middle East, in the first Intifada in the late 1980's, when the violence resumed again, the casualty ratio of Palestinians to Israelis was about 10 to 1, that's about deaths and serious injuries. Now the numbers are 1,500 to 400, under 4 to 1. Why? Because the terrorists are able, both to find unusual instruments like that gorgeous 18-year-old girl that blew herself and all those other people apart and because their weapons are more powerful. Technology is making it possible to kill more people in old-fashioned ways.

In Northern Ireland and I have a special pride in this because my mother's people come from County Fermona, from a little village called Roslee, which is on the border of the Irish Republic in Northern Ireland. They decided they would have a shared future. They agreed on certain rules of the game, knowing full well that the rules now slightly benefit the Protestants because they're the majority, but 30 years from now because of birth rates, the Catholics will be in the majority, or the plurality because they're also like every place else having more immigration, which also comes with economic success.

In the Middle East, instead of a shared future, they decided to reassert exclusive claims. The compromise once again began. It was viewed as weak and corrupt. So instead of a shared future, they have shared destruction, but the Middle East is every bit as interdependent as Northern Ireland. What happened on September the 11th is just as much a reflection of the interdependence of the modern world and the importance of technology. It's what you do everyday. So we have a world that is interdependent, but not integrated.

The great challenge of your generation of citizens, not just the United States, but the world, and particularly people who are in the positive side of the world's movement, it to move our world from interdependence to integration. At the end of the Cold War, the great conflict is between the forces of integration and harmony and the forces of disintegration and chaos. We have to strengthen the positive forces and weaken the negative ones. There's something obviously that has to be done by governments and some things that have to be done in the private sector. And even those things that have to be done by governance are important to you because now more half the world's people live under democracies. So what citizens know and what they support and what they insist that their leaders do is more important now than at any time in human history.

Most of these problems, these conflicts, are rooted in the paradoxes of the modern world, many of which were pointed out by the village portrait Pete painted in his introduction. But let me just run through them quickly.

Take the economic paradox of the modern world, it is true that the global economy has lifted more people out of poverty than any time in history. There's never been anything like it. It applies to poor countries as well as wealthier ones. On the other hand, the birth rates in the world have been so high and so many countries are left out of this that notwithstanding the success of the global economy, half the world's people live on less than $2.00 a day. A billion people live on less than $1.00 a day and a billion people go to bed seriously hungry every night.

Consider the social paradox. The benefits of education are greater than ever before, even in poor countries. One extra year of schooling adds 10-15% to annual income for life, and therefore more people are going to school than ever before. On the other hand, there are about 130 million kids who never go to school at all: Half the children in Sub-Sahara in Africa, a quarter of the kids in the subcontinent, a quarter of the kids in the poorest countries in East Asia.

Many of us after September the 11th, learned a lot about the madrassahs, the religious schools in Pakistan along the Afghan border where children are more likely to be indoctrinated than educated, but most people don't know why they have so many and why so many children go. The reason is Pakistan went broke in the early 80's and they were our ally in the early cold war so we continued to give them nice airplanes and other weapons but we didn't give them any money for their schools. So the people running the madrassahs moved into a vacuum because poor people had to spend money to send their kids to public schools from 1981 forward, often to get an education and then not be able to find a job.

Or look at the healthcare. As I said, infant mortality is down, life expectancy's up. But 10 million kids are going to die this year from completely preventable infectious diseases and of all the people who die on earth this year from anything (from strokes, heart attacks, cancers, natural disasters, accidents, crimes, war); 1 in 4 people will perish from AIDS, TB, Malaria and infections related to diarrhea, most of them little children who never got a single clean glass of water in their entire lives.

Or consider the environmental paradox. In some ways, the most interesting of all and the one that I think information technology will have a great role in resolving. Prosperity normally brings a cleaner environment. I can remember the first time I went to Japan, the air was not clean in Tokyo. Now it's clean and it's cleaner than it is in Little Rock, where I grew up. In America, we had the best economy we ever had in the years I served as President. We also had cleaner air, cleaner water, safer food and preserved more land in the lower 48 States than at any time since the presidency of Theodore Roosevelt. However and it is true that really poor countries have terrible environmental problems. But the aggregate impact of economic activity, as we are still moving from an industrial economy into an information one, is negative.

So that we have a severe water shortage in the world, the quality of our oceans are deteriorating and we get most of our oxygen from them, and now virtually everyone on earth has finally given up denying the phenomenon of global warming. If the climate warms for the next 50 years at the rate of the last 10, here are some of the things that will happen. Whole island nations in the Pacific will be flooded. In the United States, we will lose the Florida Everglades I did so much to try to restore. In New York, where I live, we will lose 50 feet of Manhattan Island. But far more important than all of that, there will be a terrific disruption of agricultural production throughout the world. Places where you used to be able to grow food, you won't be able to grow it anymore and that will create tens of millions of food refugees and make a lot more young men willing to be terrorists and mercenaries and cause trouble throughout the world.

If you've been to the Middle East lately, you know one of the biggest problems they have is water. You never read about that in the questions about why we can't resolve some of the problems there. But the Dead Sea is drying up at an alarming rate. One of things I'm trying to do with my foundation is to work with people around the world to figure out how to save it.

Finally, let's look at the security and the political paradoxes of the world. What we used to worry about was nuclear war between great powers or the resumption of some major conventional war supported by the great powers. Now we have this constructive relationship, with a lot of disagreements, but a basically positive relationship between the United States and Russia and China. We see unprecedented international cooperation to try to stop slaughter in the Balkans, where we did it. I went to Burundi, a place where no American President had ever been. Actually I went to Tanzania to the Peace Conference there with President Nelson Mandela and we worked to try to stop a big tribal slaughter in Burundi, something you never think about America as doing before.

We worked with our friends in Australia to stop the killing in East Timor. Now it's about to become the first new nation of the 21st Century, a big thing for Asia to stop that. And we were actually roundly criticized because we did not go in and stop the killing in Rwanda, where 700,000 people were cut to death mostly by machetes in only 90 days. So there's this expectation that we should all work together, those of us that are fortunate, to try to stop things like that.

On the other hand, the greatest threat to our security comes out of our interdependence, our vulnerability everywhere to enemies from within. To people who use sophisticated weapons in an open society to advance exclusive claims rooted in ancient hatreds, the most ancient difficulties of people based on our racial, ethnic, tribal and religious differences.

So in every major aspect of life we have these sort of paradoxical situation and that's why both the work you do and what happened on September the 11th are both reflective of the interdependent world we live in and those of us that are getting all the benefits of it simply cannot claim those benefits without being exposed to the risks. So if you don't want to put yourselves out of business and reelect the laws of the world, which you couldn't do anyway. We have no choice but to move from an interdependent world to an integrated world. I believe that will require us essentially to do three things.

First of all, we need to have the security approach, a sort of prevent and punish approach to people who break the rules that the interdependent world requires. That means, from my point of view, that we should support the President, and our allies and our troops in staying in Afghanistan until they finally get Mr. Bin Laden and all of his senior aides. I'm glad we got rid of the Taliban. They were the most repressive government on earth, especially to women and little girls, but they didn't murder the 3,100 people in America (people from 70 nations, by the way) on September the 11th, Bin Laden did. So we should stay there and finish that job.

The second thing we have to do is to make a vigorous effort to restrain the production and distribution of smaller scale nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. We began a very serious effort to restrain nuclear materials in 1991, before I became President, a bipartisan effort sponsored by Senator Nunn and Senator Luger. We spent a lot of your tax money, if you're Americans, in my time trying to make sure we secured Russia's nuclear stocks. Not just destroyed weapons and destroyed American weapons. Right before I left office, we agreed to destroy 50 tons of plutonium between us.

Then in 1999, we began an aggressive effort to try to do the same thing with biological stocks. Russia still has the largest stock of biological agents in the world and there are a lot of other countries trying to develop them. In 1995, the Federal Law Enforcement officials broke up kind of a right-wing kook's laboratory in a garage outside Minneapolis, but he was trying to make biological weapons, and we had this Anthrax scare here.

The good news about biological weapons is while they're the scariest, it's also harder to do than you think. You see, in theory there was enough Anthrax in all those letters to kill tens of thousands of people. In practice, 5 people died. If they hadn't died I would almost be glad it happened, because it gave us a great run-through. With all that money we've been spending since 1999, the cities and the States had to really think about whether our defenses were adequate.

But this is the issue, by the way, that you should be focused on when there's discussion arises about what the world should or shouldn't do with Iraq. Saddam Hussein, the American government has acknowledged, had nothing to do with September the 11th. He could not possibly have fielded that network. He doesn't have that competence. His military strength is about 40% of what it was when he was waxed in about 100 hours in the Gulf War. That's not what the problem is. The problem is that he won't let the U.N. Inspectors in and he's got all these little labs around the country where guys are trying to figure out how to make chemical and biological weapons. And in the future, the delivery systems for them, more likely than a missile, will be some terrorist as you have seen in what's going on in the Middle East, so it's important that we try to restrain that.

The third thing we've got to do is to get back to work with North Korea to end North Korea's missile program. The only short-term threat we face that would require the erection of a missile defense is if North Korea gives the missiles it can already make to people who could put bad warheads on them and lob them at us or Europe or some other civilized place. It's ironic because North Korea is in many ways a totally failed State. They can't feed their people. When their soldiers defect, they weigh less than 100 pounds, quite often, but they're world-class missile builders. It sounds bizarre that you can't grow food but you can build missiles but that's what they do. So we ended their nuclear weapons program in '94. We stopped their missile tests in '98. The government has announced, our government has and their government has, that they're willing to talk again. This is a huge deal. Not something you read a lot about in the press. It is a huge deal. If they end their missile program and we give them some energy and some food and help them a little bit, it means that your kids won't have to worry about somebody lobbing a missile at you if you live in any developed country for another 5 or 6 years while we work on all these other problems. So this is important.

It's important that we help our friends to fight terror. From the Philippines to Africa, where we started a program to train Africans to restrain their own tribal slaughters and most importantly today, in Columbia, the oldest democracy in the Americas except for ours, where today more than a third of the land is in the hands of this motley collection of these people who call themselves Guerrillas, but they're basically terrorists who thrive on narco-trafficking. They get a cut of all the drugs that are grown and sold. When I was President, I got the Congress to give some money to Columbia to try to fight the narco-traffickers and by in direction, the terrorists. President Bush has asked the Congress to broaden the law to let them exclusively spend the money to fight them both in the same way. That is absolutely the right position and I hope that the members in my party will support that. We can't afford to lose the oldest democracy in South America to a collection of terrorists and narco-traffickers, so these things are important.

Then there's the question of our domestic defenses and I won't go through all that but there are a lot of things that need to be done. The most important thing though is one that was completely overlooked. After we had the terrorist incident in Oklahoma City in 1995, I asked Congress to triple funding for counter-terrorism, mostly on domestic defenses and a lot has been done but a lot more needs to be done. We're stockpiling vaccines, for example, against smallpox and things of that kind, that's good. But amazing-- You will find this amazing and this is where you and companies like you can have a big role. There was almost nothing done to modernize the information technology of the Federal law enforcement, to integrate the FBI, the CIA and other information systems and to use information that is available on all people who come into this country.

As all of you know quite well, somebody's got all of us on computers, if we live here. Somebody knows, you know, where we pay our light bill and our water bill and our telephone bill and what our aggregate credit card debt is. All of this stuff is available. Before we think about whether we need to infringe further on the civil liberties of Americans and immigrants in this country, we ought to at least make sure first that law enforcement simply has what everybody else has.

For example, the largest mass mailing companies in the country have information that if the FBI had had it, I believe it could have prevented September the 11th. A friend of mine in Arkansas works for Axion, which is the biggest one. He called me after the thing was over. He said, “You won't believe this. But we've got a lot of these people in our computers.” You say, “So what? You couldn't know they were terrorists.” That's not quite true. The CIA had identified two of these people who came in America with a Visa to go With a Visa that said they were going to “X” place and they went to “Y” place, so you could keep up with that. Also Mohammed Atta the ringleader has more than half a dozen addresses. Two places where he lived, all the rest were safehouses. Well, you know if a person comes into this country and they have 8 or 10 addresses, they're either filthy rich or up to no good. It would be easy to do a check on that and you wouldn't have to herd people around just because they were Muslims or because they had Arab surnames or because they came from Indonesia or something. You just do the same thing. You use the information that's available on all of us.

One of the men who died on September the 11th had listen to this 30 credit cards and an outstanding debt of over a quarter of a million dollars on which he was making a consolidated debt payment of $9,800 a month. Well, you know, if a guy just comes to this country 6 months or a year ago and he's got 30 credit cards and he's a quarter of million dollars in debt, he's either filthy rich or up to no good. So there are ways in which and I urge you I mention this because the government has actually contracted with some companies to try to get this capacity in the near-term while we develop it over the long run. But this is something I ask all of you to think about.

Now America has been largely successful in maintaining a sense of freedom, an and openness and there hasn't been a big rise in anti-immigration feeling. I give President Bush a lot of credit for this because he went to a mosque and met with Muslim leaders right after September the 11th, and said, “Our enemy is not Islam. Our enemy is terror.” We know in America that the lifeblood of our country consists of our being able to accommodate people of every country, every faith, every racial and ethnic background. So we haven't yet had the kind of anti-immigration votes you see in the French election, in Austria, in Denmark, and Norway and maybe now coming in the Netherlands. We have to keep that. That's important. So all this is a big deal.

The most important thing; however, of all these things that we could do to prevent further terrorist actions, I think, is to stay involved now that we're back involved in the Middle East peace process until we get a resolution of it. If you want to talk about it more later, we can. But the bottom line is, they can't make peace if we don't help. Nobody else can do it. The Europeans can't do it. The U.N. can't do it, for one simple reason. The Israelis believe right across the political spectrum that America's the only great nation that in the end cares whether they live or die and would stop them from going out of existence. That means that we then become the only nation that has the power to advocate to them a just and decent resolution of the Palestinians' plight, and which we should also do. Then we have to have help from the Europeans, from Russia, from the U.N. In the end, there'll probably have to be troops going to the Middle East to try to accelerate any peace process that exists because there will be people who oppose it, no matter what it is. But the continuing difficulties in the Middle East provide a pretest for a lot of the terrorist activity that goes on around the world.

Now, here's what I want to say about that. That's good. I'm all for prevent and punish but it's not enough. I'm the oldest of the baby boomers. I hate it, every time I think about it, but I am. I was born in 1946 and I grew up in a world where I had a chance to become the first person in my family to graduate from college. I had the life of my dreams. My wife and I were able to raise a daughter and give her a good education and we had a good life. Because at the end of World War II, Harry Truman and George Marshall and Douglas MacArthur out in the Pacific, told us that we had World War II and the Depression before it. Because after World War I, the winners walked away from the mess and went back to their business.

You know, Marshall was very eloquent about this. He was a five-star General. He spent his whole life making war and he said, “We need to take just a little money here to make a world with more friends and fewer enemies, to strengthen the forces of freedom and free markets.” That's what the Marshall Plan was all about. And MacArthur said Japan should be a part of it. Truman, who was only the only guy running for anything said, “Okay.” Now you can well imagine what we might have said at the end of World War II. American taxpayers would say, “Are you out of your mind? We should spend money on Germany? After what they did, we should spend money on Japan after the POW camps they ran, and all the people who died? You want us to spend the taxpayer's money after all we've been through to do this? You must be nuts.” Even our European allies, they were old successful societies. We want to get back to our knitting,” that's exactly what happened after World War I.

But after World War II, Harry Truman said, “You're absolutely right” and we spent a little bit of money to make the world that I grew up in. A world where we had an unparalleled economic growth. We built the great middle class. There was never a third world war and eventually freedom and free markets won out over communism and the Berlin Wall fell in 1989.

So the most important thing I want to say to you today is America is at a unique moment in history. It can't last forever, where we are the dominant political economic and military power of the world. The European union is still becoming, but it will become. It will become more unified politically and economically. China is rising. Japan will recover. The world will become more multi-polar and we will be judged based on how we use this moment in history, to make a world with more partners and fewer terrorists.

Now, what does that mean? It means we should continue, in my judgment, to expand trade and resist protectionism and strengthen the World Trade Organization, because when people can make a living, they're normally more interested than that then blowing up bombs.

Secondly, it means that we should give more aid, for good purposes. Let me just say, the big problem here is that most Americans think that we give more than we do and that what we give is wasted and they're wrong on both counts. Remember what I said earlier. Free people cannot make good decisions if they have bad information. If you did a poll in America today and you said, “Why do you think people around the world are so anti-American?” Americans would say, “Well, they resent our wealth and power.” But in fact, if you do a poll around the world and there's been lots of research on this in just the last 2 years, and you ask people who are anti-America, “Why don't you like America?” They say, “Well, they're a very impressive country, but they don't know enough, care enough and do enough about the rest of the world.” In other words, they don't resent our wealth and power. They resent how we use it or don't use it. It's very different.

If you poll Americans Ask yourself this question. If you're an American citizen, ask yourself this question inside, quietly. “What do you think-- What percentage of your budget do you believe goes to foreign aid? What percentage of your tax dollars that you send to Washington, D.C., do you believe goes to foreign aid?” Poll after poll shows that Americans believe that we spend about 10 to 15% of our money on foreign aid. Then I want you to ask yourself and answer, “How much of your budget do you think should go to foreign aid?” Poll after poll says most Americans said between 3 and 5%. Actually I agree with that. I'd be one of those guys who said 3 to 5%, if they'd ask me.

Here are the facts. The facts are we spend less than 1% of your budget on foreign aid. Of the 22 wealthiest countries in the world, we spend by far the smallest percentage of our budget on foreign assistance than any developed country. By far, nobody else is anywhere near as low as we are.

Now, in the cold war, we justified that (when we actually gave more aid, by the way) on the theory that we were spending almost 6% of our income on defense and we were defending the rest of the world so Europe and Japan should write the foreign aid checks and we'd write the defense checks. But we moved down to about 3 1/2% of our income on defense and we actually reduced foreign aid and it was a terrible mistake. I had this fight every year I was President, and particularly in the last few. So we don't do enough.

The second thing is, what we do does work now. We have learned an enormous amount and I will just give you three quick examples:

One, where we had total bipartisan support. In 2000, we adopted America's share of the Global Debt Relief Initiative, which the Pope and Bono and Jessie Helms were for. You know, in our country, normally if everybody's for something, there's something wrong with it. But in this case, there wasn't anything wrong with it. It was based on an American idea that we should give debt relief to the poorest countries, but only if they could prove they spent every bit of the money on education, healthcare or economic development.

In 1 year, Uganda took its savings and doubled primary school enrollment and cut class size. In 1 year, Honduras, a country that used to have terrible problems, went from 6 years to 9 years of mandatory schooling. Now, keep in mind what I told you. Every single one of those kids will add 10% to his or her annual income for life for every extra year of schooling, so it does work.

It works with AIDS. Uganda cut its AIDS rate in half in 5 years with prevention. Brazil cut it in half in 3 years with prevention and medicine. We know how to do this now. When President Bush went to Monterey to the Conference of Poor Nations and said we'd go from $10 billion to $15 billion in aid from 2006. That's a very good start but you should know how the rest of the world would view it. When that happens, we will still be spending less than 20% less of our income on assistance to other countries than we were in 1995, so I think we have to build a world with more partners and fewer adversaries.

The last point I want to make is, in addition to a security strategy, a more partners and fewer terrorists strategy, we need to overtly support the idea that there can and must be a global community that works more or less like your company does, where there are simple rules. Everybody counts. Everybody deserves a chance. We all do better when we work together. The value base of those rules is a simple one. Our differences are important and they make life more interesting, but our common humanity matters more.

Now, it's easy for us. We're in this beautiful hotel, this beautiful place. You've had great success. It's easy for us to say, “Yeah, we buy that.” Look around this room. If this company existed 40 years ago, would the composition of this room look like this? I don't think so. So it's easy for us to say that. But it's important for us to remember that for most of human history, and all of prehistory, community has been a double-edged sword. That is if you were in a community and by definition meant you weren't in another one. From the time people walked out of caves and started clans to fight over food and shelter, they learned to cooperate within because they divided labor, tasks and they could get more done if they cooperated, but they also were protecting themselves from people who weren't them, from the other.

Civilization is only 6,000 years old and even in the 20th Century, we took all that progress we've made Well, for the first 5,900 years and darn near destroyed ourselves in the bloodiest century in history because we kept defining the meaning of our lives by negative reference. “There's my crowd and their crowd and for our crowd to do well, we got to get them.” The meaning of our lives for Hitler was killing the Jews and all other so-called deviants and try to become the new Napoleon. The Japanese were going to overcome all this accumulated shame and humiliation that they've been put in and they thought they were going to dominate China and have control of the East. Then the Russians justified what they were doing because of what happened to them and their need to control everybody around them. And then there were all these other little wars with big bombs and little guns.

The United Nations, the idea that there could be a global community was finally embraced in 1945 at the end of World War II, but it was stunted because of the Cold War. So for less than 15 years, since 1989, finally after all this time, the possibility of a global community opened up. But to have a global community doesn't mean you give up your identity. You don't give up your family. You don't give up the fact that you belong to the Compuwear family. You don't give up your faith. You don't give up your country. You don't give up your racial or ethnic heritage. You get to cherish them all but only in the context of the capacity to join ever-larger communities. That's what globalization is all about, and that's what it will take to move us from an interdependent world to an integrated world, but it's going to be hard.

In my lifetime, the greatest person I believe ever walked the planet was Ghandi. What happened to Ghandi? Finally he creates India. Right? Non-violence. He doesn't kill anybody. He risked his life for decades. He doesn't kill anybody. Then at the moment of his triumph... First of all, he's rendered with heartbreak because the Muslims don't want to be part of a country where they're not the majority of and they all want to hightail it off to new Pakistan and then he gets murdered not by a Muslim but by a fellow Hindu, a young angry man, who thought Ghandi had betrayed his faith and his nation because he wanted India for the Hindus and the Muslims and the Jains and the Sikhs and the Buddhists and the Christians and the Jews. India's every bit as diverse as America is.

Fast-forward it into history. My senior year in college, Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy were killed because they were in their different ways trying to reconcile the American people to each other.

Go into the Middle East in 1981, Anwar Sadat was murdered, not by an Israeli Commando but by an Egyptian who thought he betrayed his faith and his country because he wanted to make peace with Israel and have a secular government in Egypt, where all the various points of views could be represented. In my service as President, one of the darkest days of my life, my friend Yitzhak Rabin was murdered. When I heard he had been shot, I knew immediately no Hamas or Islamic jihad had killed him. He was killed by an angry young Israeli who thought he had betrayed his Judaism and his country by believing that the only peace for Israel lay in reconciliation in a homeland for the Palestinians.

All these things that you may think are bad actually reflect how people have behaved for most of human history. There's our crowd and their crowd. We have the truth and they don't. Our life has value and theirs doesn't. A community is made up of people who act alike and think alike and that's it. But we live in an interdependent world and we literally cannot make of it what it ought to be unless we make it a home for all the children of the world. Nobody has to give up anything except the claim to exclusive truth.

We now have to teach the adults what we all taught our children. It's better to share than to grab. As simple as it seems, after all the years I served, it basically all comes down to that. Yes, we need a good security system, prevent and punish. Yes, we've got to make a world with more partners and fewer terrorists. But in the end, for the first time, people now have no choice but to believe that the only way their community can survive and flourish is if part of a larger community which says, “We really like our differences and they're really important, but our common humanity matters more.” Thank you very much. 

{/speech}
