{title} Summation and Closing Address of the Clinton Global Initiative {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} September 22, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Now, we have a few health commitments. The first is a commitment from UNICEF, and I'd like to ask the executive director, Ann Veneman, who was secretary of agriculture in President Bush's first term, to come up here. I have had the honor to work with Ann and with UNICEF in my capacity as the UN Special Envoy on Tsunami Recovery, and it's a great organization, and you have done a terrific job in getting to the bottom of all the responsibilities you have. I thank you so much.

UNICEF's new Accelerated Child Survival and Development Program will operate in 10 African countries where UNICEF and the national governments have found opportunities to cut the death rate among children. The program will eliminate bottlenecks that prevent desperately needed services from reaching children, creating packages with country-specific cost-effective priority interventions, like vaccinating children, promoting breast feeding, giving vitamin A supplements, and organizing community prenatal care. By 2009, the Accelerated Child Survival and Development Program will save an estimated 399,000 lives a year.

Almost six million of the 11 million children who die every year could be saved. More than half of the children who die every year could be saved by low-tech, evidencebased, cost-effective measures like these -- like vaccines, antibiotics, micronutrient supplements, insecticide-treated bed nets, and improved family care and breastfeeding practices. Each year, vitamin A supplementation alone saves over a quarter million lives. Oral rehydration prevents an estimated million deaths. Immunization programs save the lives of three million children. So, I thank you, and Africa thanks you, with 10 percent of the world's population but 42 percent of all the deaths of children under 5. Thank you very much, Ann Veneman. {APPLAUSE}

This is a commitment from the DeBeers family of companies. I'd like to ask Jonathan Oppenheimer, the chairman, Jennifer Oppenheimer, and the president of Tanzania, President Kikwete, who's here behind me, please come up. {APPLAUSE} The commitment is to create a Community/Diamond Partnership to encourage economic development and good health in Tanzanian communities with small-scale diamond mining. DeBeers will work with Williamson Diamond, Ltd. and the government of Tanzania to insure that unregulated Tanzanian miners maintain good health and get their fair share of the wealth they create, by pushing for better regulation of informal mining, offering innovative smart wallet technology with third-party verification to make sure miners don't fall prey to rogue traders who buy stones for prices well below their worth. Equally important, the Community/Diamond Partnership will work to transform the communities surrounding the mines, offering health services to manage HIV/AIDS and malaria, supporting sustainable farming and providing training and education programs. The goal is to produce a model that can be replicated in other unmanaged small scale diamond mining economies, including those in Sierra Leone, Angola, Guinea, and the DRC.

This is a profoundly important thing. I had the honor of working in Tanzania on HIV and AIDS. I have a high regard for the new President and his predecessor. They're a wellorganized, committed country doing good work. And they deserve this kind of support. And the idea that this is being done through mining, which has been such a source of exploitation and shame and destruction in Africa for too long, is a wonderful, wonderful thing. So I thank all of you. Congratulations. {APPLAUSE}

What Mr. Oppenheimer said on the way down reminded me that these principles could be applied to all forms of mining and not just diamonds. That's another example of an idea we could have for next year.

Now, I would like to ask to the stage Frank Sasinowski, the Director of the Catholic Medical Mission Board, and Sister Pat Eck of the Catholic Medical Mission Board, to come up here. The Catholic Medical Mission Board is making a commitment worth two million dollars over the next two years to solicit pharmaceutical company donations and volunteer medical staff to treat neglected tropical and chronic diseases in Honduras and Kenya. Volunteer nurses and physicians from the United States will use the donated medications to help diagnose illnesses and deliver the donated life-sustaining products to over 50,000 Hondurans alone. In Kenya, we will have the same sort of program, where the total health expenditure today is just over $65 a person and accounts for about four percent of GDP.

In both countries, there is just over one nurse per 1,000 people, not enough. Part of our AIDS work in Kenya involves training and actually hiring new nurses to try to stop the collapse of the nation's health care efforts. So this is a very, very important commitment by the Catholic Medical Mission Board. Let's give them a big hand while they sign it. Thank you. {APPLAUSE}

Now I'd like to call on the chair of our Poverty Alleviation working group, Gayle Smith, to take the microphone. She's a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress. She served on the National Security Council when I was in the White House, between 1994 and 2001. We couldn't have done half of the good things we did in Africa without her. She's not responsible for any mistake I made. And she is now a massive asset to CGI. When we go to Africa, people believe we were cloned together. {LAUGHTER} Gayle, the floor is yours. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
