{title} President William Jefferson Clinton Remarks as Delivered For Families USA {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} January 23, 2003 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech}

Thank you very much for the warm welcome.

And, Ron, thank you for the reference to Hillary. You actually should have given her a bigger round of applause because, unlike me, she can still do something for you.

I am delighted to be here. Chris Jennings, who was my health care adviser in the White House, and several other people who worked with us are here today. And I see a lot of other old friends in the audience, some of whom I worked with in Arkansas over 20 years ago.

I can't say how much gratitude I feel for the work that Families USA did with us, the information they gave to us, and the mistakes they kept us from making during the eight years I had the privilege to serve here in Washington.

Social change is hard work. In 1918, in a remarkable essay called "Politics as a Vocation," the great German sociologist smart guy Max Weber said: "Politics is the long and slow boring of hard boards."

Ron Pollack and the Families USA crowd have never forgotten that, never whined about it, never quit in the face of frustration and defeat. They just keep boring the hard boards. And I'm very, very grateful.

{APPLAUSE}

I came to talk today primarily about the situation in health care and some things I think ought to be done. But I'd like to just do a very brief scene-setter to put this in the larger context of global events. Why are we here talking about this when all the breathless discussion is what's about to happen in Iraq, and is North Korea developing nuclear weapons, and where are Osama bin Laden and Al- Zawahiri, and what should we be worried about? I think this is a perfect time to be here, and I want to explain why.

My view is that the 21st century, which most people would characterize as an age of globalization, is instead an age of global interdependence

I use the word interdependence instead of globalization because for most of us, globalization has an exclusively economic connotation. And the world has been this globalized in purely economic terms before.

A century ago, before the outbreak of World War I, the rich countries in the world -- the United States and the major European powers -- were as trade dependent as we are now. As a percentage of our population, immigration flows just before and just after the turn of the last century were even greater than today.

We are more socially diverse today, but today, in addition to that, we have the Internet, we have global telecommunications, we have much more widespread travel than ever before. We are interconnected in fundamentally profound ways that go way beyond the economics that we've seen in the past.

Now, my basic analysis of this time is, if we live in an interdependent world and a set of interlocking interdependent communities all the way down to your neighborhood, that interdependence is good if you're in position to take advantage of it, but not necessarily good. Interdependence is a nice way of saying you cannot escape each other, you can't get away from each other.

It was really good to us in the 1990s. We made a lot of jobs. We made a lot of income gains. The fastest growing income gains were in the upper 10 percent, but the second fastest growing was in the bottom 20 percent. And that's before our tax policy made it even better. So we tried to grow together.

But if you're not in a position to take advantage of it or you do not see the benefits of it or you don't recognize any fundamental responsibilities or you think that the values of the people doing well are alien to yours, then a lot of bad things can happen.

So on 9/11, people who perceive no benefits from this world, recognize no responsibilities, and thought their values irreconcilable with ours, killed 3,100 people from 70 nations in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania. So interdependence is not enough.

In the health care context, everybody's interdependent, which means if you've got health insurance, you're paying higher than you would because of all the people who don't have health insurance. Right? All of you know that. Although I had a hard sell on it in '93 and '94.

{LAUGHTER}

In any interdependent environment we must always be striving to go from interdependence to integration, to a community of shared benefits and shared responsibilities, rooted in shared values. Simple values: everybody counts; everybody deserves a chance; everybody has a responsible role to play; we all do better when we work together.

Now, why does that mean we should be working on health care while most people are focused on terror or weapons of mass destruction or other problems? Because we have to move the world from interdependence to integration.

And to do that, we have to do four things: We need a security strategy. We also need a positive strategy to make a world with more partners and fewer terrorists, just like we did at the end of World War II with the Marshall Plan and rebuilding Japan.

We need a strategy to do more work in organized ways through international institutions, which is why it's important to work through the U.N. on this Iraq business, why we were right to go to the U.N., get the resolution, and why it's important to let these inspectors do their work.

{APPLAUSE}

But we also have to recognize that a big part of America's appeal in the world comes from the power of example. So we have to keep trying to be better at home. You can't just say, "Oh, well, we've got a lot of problems around the world, therefore let's just forget about where we are at home. And four or five years from now, when there are no more problems in the world, we'll think about whether all the problems in America should be addressed again." It doesn't work like that.

We've got some big, profound challenges in health care now. If we address them in the right way, we will continue the process of the integration of America into a community with shared benefits, responsibilities and values. And the process will make America stronger. We will be a better beacon of hope and more likely to make a world with more partners and fewer terrorists.

So I think that it's very important that you're here. We just can't stop trying to make America better. As a matter of fact, no one really thinks that these terrorists are going to win a military victory over us, even if, God forbid, there should be another terrible incident or two in our country. The only way that we could be vanquished is if we respond to this moment in a way that compromises the future of our children or the character of our country.

Every time you come to a meeting like this and you try to deal with the health care challenges, you are acting in a way that is good for the future of our children and consistent with the character of America, and our eternal mission, to form a more perfect union.

So you should feel good about being here. You should feel energized. And if people tells you they don't have time to think about this now, they've got to think about that other stuff, tell them that that's what you develop a brain for so you can think about more than one thing at once.

{LAUGHTER}

It's really important.

{APPLAUSE}

The next point I want to make is there's a lot of good news in health care. The 21st century is going to see stunning advances in health care as a result of the sequencing of the human genome. We've already found the genetic variances that are the highest predictors of breast cancer and we're getting very close on Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. Eventually genomics will really help us in dealing with diabetes.

And the development of nanotechnology, into which, when I was president, we sunk about a billion dollars of your tax money, has raised the prospects of new diagnostic technologies to identify tumors so small they are presently unidentifiable, raising the prospect that virtually all cancers will become curable.

I fully expect that sometime within the next 20 years, the average life expectancy for children born in the United States will rise above 90 years.

So there's a lot to be hopeful about.

At the same time, you all know what the current challenges are. After we reversed the rise in uninsured for the first time in 12 years, they're going up again, accompanied by double-digit increases in health insurance premiums, which cause great anxiety for businesses, states and millions of American families.

Furthermore, putting more money into health care to pay more for the same health care at a time when there's no inflation and under- investment elsewhere is aggravating the nation's economic downturn and increasing the upturn in unemployment and uninsured. It's also, thank goodness, spurring new interest across the political spectrum in the question of health care reform.

I thought about this coming down here today. I thought about Yogi Berra, everybody's friend. We've got an economic recession with the number of uninsured people going up -- sounds like deja vu all over again. And we have a chance to get it right this time, because people in both parties are talking seriously about new proposals. But there's a risk that things that look like they're doing something actually can make the situation worse.

I think we have to avoid two things in health care in this debate: One is just doing something because it looks good even though we know it won't make it better. The other is using this debate to divide the American people again. Keep in mind, consensus is a good word, not a bad word, as long as it results in real progress. Nobody's got the whole truth on this, and if this were easy, somebody would have done it a long time ago.

The fundamental problem, if you believe, as I do, that the number-one task of the world is to move from interdependence to an integrated community, and the number-one task of America is to find gaps in the way we do our business and try to make a more integrated community here is that politics often rewards division, fear and negativism in the moment.

I was stunned that in 2002 we could have elections turn in the South on the need to punish two governors who took the Confederate flag off the South Carolina dome and the Georgia flag. It's exactly what we do not need if the main task of America in the 21st century is to move from interdependence to an integrated community. We have to keep that in mind in health care.

If we expect others to compromise and to have their ears opened, then we have to do the same. We can't really believe that we are the repositories of all truth, but neither can we be played for suckers.

Now, I was grateful that Ron mentioned some of the things that we did in the 1990s. Over 35 million people have used the Family and Medical Leave Act now. When we did it, I was told it was going to be terrible for the economy. It turned out to be good for the economy. Why? Because it was an integrating device, because when most parents are in the workforce and the most important job of any society is raising children and holding families together, then you have to find things that help them to succeed at work and at home. That's what family leave does. In that sense, it is a metaphor for the kinds of things that we ought to be doing today.

The CHIP program was really important. We have over 4.6 million children now who have health insurance as a result of the Children's Health Insurance Program. It was the biggest expansion in child health care since the Medicaid program in 1965.

We also ended drive-by deliveries and improved coverage for screening for breast cancer and prostrate cancer and colorectal conditions. And we had a dramatic increase in diabetes health care and self-management, which the American Diabetes Association said was the most important advance in diabetes care since the development of insulin.

We fought against the cuts in Medicaid and block granting. 85 million Americans were covered by the executive order that gave the protections of the patients' bill of rights to people in federal programs, in Medicare, Medicaid, Veterans Administration care, and the federal employees health insurance program.

We also tried to deal with the waste and inefficiencies in the federal programs. When I took office in 1993, Medicaid was supposed to go broke in 1999. We added 30 years to the life of the program. When I left office, we had enough money for Medicaid to be solvent until 2029 and for Social Security, if the surplus were properly applied, to be solvent until 2053.

So what's happened since? Well, part of it is we had a big drop in the stock market, a big crisis in the economy occasioned by September the 11th, and the need to spend more money on national defense as a result.

But we can't overlook the fact that we've got 41 million Americans and rising without health insurance. Premiums are going through the roof again and they're going up at a time when other inflation is quite low. Many companies are facing premium increases as high as 25 percent. And as everybody knows, these costs are being passed on to employees in the form of higher premiums and large co-payments.

The Kaiser Family Foundation recently issued a study that said that employer plans increased deductibles by 13 percent. Now, the employers are worried about how they're going to keep their obligations to their workers, meet their bottom lines and compete in the world economy. And the more Americans who lose their jobs and lose their health insurance, the worse this is going to be.

We also can't look to the states now because they're in the worst fiscal crisis since World War II. The reports are that 18 states are already planning to reduce Medicaid coverage and 15 states are thinking of reducing benefits. And this could be just the beginning.

Furthermore, in times likes this, states usually get a little extra help from Washington, but instead they're going to give the money to me.

{LAUGHTER}

I get the money. You can see that I can afford a nice suit and a tie, but I need an income tax cut and a dividend tax cut. They want to give the money to me.

{LAUGHTER}

I don't get it.

{APPLAUSE}

I don't get it.

So the administration says that there should be a tax credit to help people buy health insurance. But if you give a worker less than $100 a month in tax credit to buy health coverage that costs more than twice that, it probably won't work.

{LAUGHTER}

It's like saying, "I'm going to give you $100-a-month tax credit to buy a car, but you have to buy a Lexus . . .

{LAUGHTER}

. . . and you figure out where the rest of the money comes from."

You know, one of my great achievements as president was that I finally found a tax cut the Republicans didn't like.

{LAUGHTER}

I was so proud of myself.

{LAUGHTER}

I worked for years and I finally found one they didn't like. I offered a 25 percent tax credit to anybody who would produce or purchase energy conservation or clean energy products. They thought that was a terrible waste of the taxpayers' money.

{LAUGHTER}

I said, you know, we combat global warming with a free-enterprise system. There's a trillion dollar market out there. But the real problem is, the old energy economy is centralized and well-financed and politically connected. The new energy economy is highly entrepreneurial and needs venture capital and is not well-connected, so let's just nudge this market.

Well, they thought that was a terrible idea. So I considered it one of the single achievements in my political career that I found a tax cut they didn't like.

Well I don't like this proposed tax cut because it won't work. It looks like we're giving people something; we're not. We have a highly inefficient way of financing health care. It may be politically attractive, but it's totally inefficient.

We're spending roughly 3 percent of GDP on administrative costs. You probably can't run a health system like ours for less than 11 percent of GDP. Canadians spend 10. The Europeans spend less. But as a practical matter, we couldn't do it for less than 11 percent, maybe 12 percent. But we're spending over 14 percent now, and it's because of the way we finance healthcare.

Yet we keep trying to find ways to jerry-rig this deal. We've made a decision as a country to throw away about 2 to 2.5 percent of our GDP every year, because this is where the politics are in the way we finance health care.

As a result, we spend more money than anybody else and cover fewer people, and charge more for the premiums to the people who are paying because we have to pay for the emergency costs that hospitals and doctors have to absorb when the people without insurance show up. Now, that can't be fixed with a tax credit.

Moreover, study after study shows that if you just leave this present financing system intact, problems will. If you were in the health insurance business and you had to make a profit, you'd make probably the same decisions they do, but they're not pretty. If you're sick or have a previous health insurance condition, then the market won't give you a quality plan. If you've got asthma, we won't cover your treatment. If you have a cancer, you can forget it. If you're over 55, we won't cover any chronic condition.

I've got a friend who's just a little older than I am. He says he's happy when he wakes up hurting every morning of his life because that's the way he knows he's still alive.

{LAUGHTER}

Those of us over 55 are in a permanent chronic condition.

If you can buy it, coverage is so expensive that very few people can really afford what they need.

So this insurance financing market that we have is already a house of cards. It works for the wealthiest people but not for most people. We've got to have some new solutions.

First, we have to figure out a way to prevent the number of uninsured from rising. We've got to help to relieve the growing burden states and employers are being asked to shoulder.

We can't move backward. Cutting people off Medicaid is not only the wrong thing to do, it's actually bad for the economy; it will spread all kinds of anxiety throughout this country. It will hurt people, it will hurt businesses, and it will hurt hospitals and health care workers. Families USA just released a report on the multiplier effect of cutbacks in Medicaid. Clearly, we should increase the federal contribution to Medicaid. It will save jobs and improve health care. We should do it without delay.

But we can't do that, because they want to give me the money.

You know, I never made a nickel to my name until I left the White House, and I love being able to talk like this now.

{LAUGHTER}

A recent study was done that found that the administration's tax proposal not only will blow a long-term hole in the federal budget, bigger than the first tax cut did, but will cost the states $4 billion in revenues a year. How many uninsured kids could you cover for 4 billion bucks? How many hospitals could you keep open for $4 billion?

So, you know, that old adage is true: The first thing you ought to do when you find yourself in a hole is to quit digging.

{LAUGHTER}

{APPLAUSE}

Instead they're looking for a bigger shovel.

{LAUGHTER}

Now, I guess I can say this because I'm not running for anything, but I think most Americans are big enough to get the truth here. As I understand it, people in my income group have already gotten a $10,000 tax cut under that first tax bill, which is 10 times as much as the average American will get when it's all phased in.

So if we froze the top rate, that's just $400,000 and above, you'd recover hundreds of billions of dollars for the next 10 years. Most people I talk to who pay the maximum rate in New York, where state taxes and local taxes are very high, think it's crazy to give us a tax cut, with all the problems America has. We're out here fighting a war on terror, with all these other problems, and they're shoving money at us.

You know, I want the people who work in this hotel to be able to send their kids to college. I'd rather them keep my tax money for that. I don't get it.

{APPLAUSE}

You can make a case for a kind of tax cut now, because of the condition of the economy, but not the one proposed. What we need is a tax cut targeted toward middle-class people who have huge credit card debts and small businesses that need incentives to invest, to hire people or keep their folks on. We could spend a good deal of money on it in one or two years, then get rid of it so we wouldn't blow a hole in the long-term deficit.

Instead, by giving a disproportionate amount of that first tax cut and a hugely disproportionate amount of this tax cut to people in my income group, what we're really going to do is pay for that tax cut out of the Social Security and Medicare trust funds. Let's don't kid ourselves. That's what we're doing.

So they're giving me money out of the Social Security trust fund so that when the people I grew up with in Arkansas, who've worked just as hard as I have all their lives, most of whom never saw $50,000 a year in their lives, when they retire, because of my tax cut, their kids are going to have to support them instead of their grandkids. Now, that's bad ethics and terrible economics.

{APPLAUSE}

And furthermore, as George Soros said the other day -- God bless his soul, he and Bill Gates gave a big speech here in Washington against repealing the estate tax. George said, "Look, right now interest rates are low, even though we're running deficits, because the economy's down. When the economy picks up, interest rates will soar, and that will slow economic recovery in America."

There's something he didn't say, if you believe we're living in an interdependent world, which is it'll be just like the 1980s, but more so. We'll still get the money, because we're rich enough to pay higher interest rates. Oh, it'll be really bad on middle-class people who want to buy homes and cars. But we'll get the money, at higher interest rates.

And whom will we take it away from? From the Africans, the Latin Americans, the East Asians, people in the Middle East, this new Middle East we want to make where average people can make a living again. Where are they going to get the money? We're going to be sucking it up to pay for the deficits we ran up to give me a tax cut. I don't get it.

Bill Gates Sr. said something the other day that made me so proud I could pop. He said, I don't understand why they keep trying to give me a tax cut. He said, "What do you think people like me would pay in advance just to be born in America? That ought to be worth something. Why do we think that we're somehow entitled to be a permanent privileged class with no responsibility to the country that's given us these opportunities?"

There was a cartoon the other day in the paper. I almost fell out of my chair laughing.

This kid is asking, "What did you do in the war on terror, Daddy?" And the daddy says, "Oh, I took a tax cut so that you could pay higher taxes when you grow up."

{LAUGHTER}

We're all supposed to sacrifice. You know, poor people don't get job-training money. Middle-class people are losing the stability of the Social Security trust fund. And people in my income group, what's our sacrifice? We have to exert the extraordinary energy necessary to open the envelope containing our tax cut.

This is a big deal. If you want to talk about health care reform, we've got to stop this. You're sitting here having a conversation about air if you don't have any money.

So the first thing we need to do, in my opinion, is say to top rate, no more tax cuts. We've already gotten 10 times what the average person is going to get out of that first tax cut.

The second thing we ought to do is to rework the administration's current proposal to have all the benefits come in the next two years targeted to small business and middle- class people. That will juice the economy again, but have no long-term impact on the deficit.

Then with the ceiling you put on the first tax cut, you will have some money to relieve the Medicaid problems on the states. We ought to give them some help out there.

The next thing we ought to do is provide a workable, affordable prescription drug benefit.

{APPLAUSE}

If we do it in the right way, it will not only provide relief to seniors, but also to states and employers whose drug costs are presently just bankrupting them, if we structure it in the right way.

Next I think we can actually use tax credits in a way that would further meaningful, workable group insurance. If you're going to use tax credits, you've got to do it in a way that creates a real market, not an illusory one, and builds on insurance reforms and protects the elderly and sick from discrimination.

It has to be carefully structured. We could pattern it on the policies of the federal employees health program. I think it would most likely do a lot more good than harm if we do it right.

Next we really do have to strengthen the basic programs, Medicare and Medicaid. The proposed tax cut and the one passed before will directly weaken Medicare, because there's no way they can be paid for without taking money that would otherwise go to Social Security and Medicare trust funds. Instead we should be bolstering those programs.

We also should give some direct help to the states, which we could well afford to do if we cap the first tax cut for the wealthiest Americans and don't pass this one in this present form.

Finally, I think we need to continue to work to get better value for our investment by supporting measures that reduce medical errors, improve medical outcomes and accelerate medical discoveries being turned into treatments and cures.

Now, President Bush has said that malpractice insurance is a driving force behind everything that ails the health care system. There are some problems with malpractice insurance premiums. If you talk to enough doctors and you see how many people don't deliver babies anymore, we'd be foolish to deny that. But to say that it is the number-one problem is like saying we can fix broken legs with Band-Aids. But we shouldn't get caught denying that there are no problems for these doctors. I've talked to too many of them who stopped doing too many things.

The first experience I had with this was when I was governor of Arkansas and I realized that we were giving 90 percent of all the immunizations in our state, including to wealthy children, through the county health units, because no doctor ever wanted to give anybody a shot again.

So we should deal with this problem, but do it as part of a comprehensive effort. And we also need to recognize that there will be occasions when people really do get hurt badly through clear negligence or worse, and they ought to be able to have their day in court.

There has to be a way that society tries to make the people who are the victims of those mistakes whole.

Let me say one final thing about all of this. We've got to try to find a bipartisan solution here. If this just gets down to a shouting match between the Democrats and Republicans, and they scream at us, "Oh, you just want to raise taxes," or this is a shouting match between trial lawyers and victims on the one hand and doctors and insurance companies on the other, then we'll have politics as usual, gridlock and no change.

We ought to go to all these groups and say, "We propose a political truce here. This is so important to the fabric of our country. If you will work with us in honest good faith and promise to do the same, we won't turn it into a political issue, as long as you don't. We won't demonize you in public if you don't demonize us first. We won't turn you into a cartoon cut-out of your position if you don't do that to us."

You can't build an integrated health care system without integrated politics. But you have to be willing to fight for real solutions to real problems.

And there are lots of things we can do. I didn't mention this, and neither did Ron, but one of the things that we did have total bipartisan agreement on when I was president is biomedical research. We more than doubled it. And there were good results for America.

We probably should develop a national treatment and cure center devoted to accelerating the time between when a discovery is made and when its practical applications are felt by people. And I think there would be a lot of support for that among the Republicans in Congress. We have got to do this together.

What I talked about today, strengthening Medicaid, strengthening SCHIP; if you want to expand coverage, the first place we ought to start -- I read Henry Aaron's article about this the other day in the press -- if we could get some relief from the burden of these tax cuts for me, we could stop the erosion of health coverage, even with premiums going up, by simply giving the states enough money to cover the parents of the children in the SCHIP program. That's something I proposed, you know, in the last year I was president.

{APPLAUSE}

When the states aren't broke, they like this SCHIP program. It's worked. We have 4.6 million kids in it.

You could then identify other discrete populations which aren't covered, like young, single people who think they're going to live forever and therefore don't want to buy anything. They could be covered by expanding the SCHIP program. The states could figure out how to do this, and we could funnel the money in there. These people are not going to be picked up by the private market anyway.

But in order to do that, the states, first of all, have to be able to fund what they're doing now, and then they have to be able to get some funding stream for this.

We should be able to do this. There was enormous bipartisan support for the SCHIP program. It was part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. I've talked to a number of Republican members of Congress who are quite proud that they voted to create that program.

Again, I want to say the way Families USA has tried to reach out to people in every sector of our society who are giving care, who are paying for care, who are receiving care is important. I think this Covering the Uninsured Week you're going to launch in the spring is very, very important. I hope all of you will participate in that.

Again, I want to acknowledge that it's easy for me to give this speech now. I have no responsibilities. But at least you know I did try for eight years to fix this, and I was willing to pay quite a high political price for it.

{APPLAUSE}

I think it's quite interesting that the worst congressional losses the Democrats suffered in the last 60 years were the midterms of Harry Truman and my first midterm, and both happened after we tried to fix health care. We both were demonized and accused of trying to have the government take over health care.

It was really interesting because at the time the experts said that we had made a very moderate proposal that allowed the private health insurance companies to stay in business. This lasted about two weeks until the health insurance industry spent a couple hundred million dollars performing its reverse plastic surgery. Now whenever you read what the press says about it, it's a classic example about how the victors in every conflict get to write the history.

So you have to be patient here. You have to be willing to fight, but you have to first offer to all the people involved the prospect of having an integrated solution, that we can do together.

This is just crazy. This is 2003. We sequenced the human genome. We figured out people genetically are 99.99 percent the same. The genetic differences between you and anyone here of European origin and me, individually, are greater than the genetic differences of racial groups from one another.

The stuff we know is stunning. And yet America, with all of our high technology, is the only rich country in the world that can't figure out how to give everybody health insurance. The reason is the way we finance it and the money we spend on the financing and the way we're always willing to put it on the back burner whenever anything else comes up.

Think how cruel it's going to be when the nanotechnology diagnostic capacity is fully realized, and those of us who can afford it will be able to walk into some tube six times a year and find every little nascent cancer and have it zapped out.

They'll be able to make substitute parts for our hearts and everything else as routine surgery instead of a massive thing. Everybody with any money is going to start living to be 95 and actually able to run around and do serious physical activity.

Are we still going to be sitting around here with 10, 15 percent of our people without health insurance? With people who can't get health care for their kids? People whose teeth are rotting out? Are we really going permit that? Is that the kind of country any self-respecting American wants to live in?

We don't have to do it. We should begin this debate in the spirit of good faith. We should recognize that we can't win an all-out fight when they have more money and they can demonize us.

But we should be persistent, and we shouldn't let people say that we don't have time to deal with this now. Because the power of America for over 200 years has been in such large measure the idea that this is a country constantly becoming, a country of constant possibility, a country of constant improvement, a country of constant effort to be a more perfect union.

We never have gotten this right. And we're still paying for it. So for all of our progress, we're in a position now where we could see a lot of people hurt in a very short time.

You're here because you don't want that to happen. I think you would be astonished at the number of people who have good health plans and good incomes who would say, "I've already gotten a bigger tax cut than most other Americans are going to get, by a large measure. Take my money and make America well." I hope you'll do it.

Thank you, and God bless you.

{/speech}
