{title} Remarks to Jewish Federation Council of Greater Los Angeles {/title}
{event} Jewish Federation Council of Greater Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} February 16, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Thank you. Please be seated. I want to begin by thanking you for that wonderful welcome. I have flown across the country today. We, we actually, believe it or not, left when the scheduler said we were supposed to, into a 130-something mile an hour headwind, so I flew into a wall all the way to California. And I apologize for being late, so we're going to do Question and Answer at the end and then we'll do pictures and If you've got a question you want to ask and didn't turn it in, I told Audrey, “I don't care. Just ask whatever you want.” {LAUGHTER} The great thing about not being in the White House anymore is that I can say whatever I think {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} although I pretty much did when I was there. {LAUGHTER} The only bad thing is, it doesn't matter anymore, nobody has to listen. {LAUGHTER} 

Let me begin by thanking you for the work that you do. I'll end my semi-prepared remarks tonight by coming back to why it is an example of what I think is very important across the 21st Century world. But it means a lot to me that you help people in need, here in the United States and Israel and throughout the world in a whole range of areas. It's an example of the kind of philosophy that I believe should dominate the world that we're living in. Essentially, it seems to me that the primary characteristics of the world today is it's complete interdependence. If you ask most people If I'd given you all a test and we start out giving everybody a little card and I said you'd have to describe the world in one word, what would your word be? Most people would write down globalization. And I don't use that word very much because it implies, at least to me, an economic relationship that is only part of what we are experiencing.

Interdependence simply means you can't escape each other, for good or ill. And we see every single day good and ill from interdependence. In the 1990's, when I was President, America got a lot of good out of interdependence. We had an enormous amount of economic growth and a third of it came from trade. When we began This is unbelievable. When I began my presidency in January of '93, there were fifty sites on the worldwide web, fifty. And it was the providence still of research physicists. The whole idea of the Internet was created by these people who were being funded by the Defense Advance Research Agency within the Department of Defense to share common scientific findings. When I left office, there were 50 million sites on the web, in only eight years. It's the fastest growing communications network in the history of the world. When I took off-- When I was elected in November of '92, the average cell phone still weighed five pounds. {LAUGHTER} I just bought one in here with me and it's so small, my fingers keep punching the wrong numbers. {LAUGHTER} 

We saw the sequencing of the human genome by an international consortium of scientists. I remember the day we announced that the genome sequencing had been completed, in my second term. I did it with Tony Blair via satellite television in London and we had representatives with Japan and Germany and all the other countries that were a part of the scientific consortium, we did this together. We put up the international space station with five or six different countries contributing. So we had a lot of positive interdependence. America became much more diverse because of positive interdependence. We have all these immigrants and I know you, one of your interests is in providing job training to new immigrants in this area.

On the other hand, September 11th, 2001 was about interdependence. The people of al Qaeda used the forces of interdependence. They used open borders, easy immigration, easy travel to kill 3,000 people from 70 countries, including over 200 other Muslims, in New York. I'll never forget. I was in Australia and President Bush kindly gave me a plane. I flew back and Hillary was down in Washington working in the Senate already, to try and get some legislation through to help the families. So my daughter and I went down to the Crisis Center where people were still hoping against hope that their relatives might have lived. And there was this long line outside the building. So I was just going up and down, doing all I could do, shaking hands, talking to people. You know? And this huge guy comes up to me. I'll never forget this as long as I live. He was a head taller than me and he had big tears in his eyes. And I said, “Did you lose someone?” And he said, “No.” He said, “I am an Egyptian Muslim American and I hate what they did more than you do and I'm afraid my fellow countrymen will never trust me again.” I'll never forget that as long as I live.

If you look at the situation with Israel and the Palestinians and its neighbors, it's a perfect exam It's like a “Perfect Storm,” interdependence. From the time we signed the Peace Agreement in '93 until near the end of my second term, for over seven years, almost exactly to the day, seven years before the second Intifada started. We had seven years of more or less positive interdependence. There were problems, of course, but there were There was always progress toward peace. In the eight years I was President, 254 Israeli citizens died of terrorist-related violence. In the next four years, over 1,000 did, as we moved from positive to negative interdependence. And over three times that many Palestinians. But when they started fighting, after Mr. Arafat walked away from the peace proposal that I made, they were no less interdependent. They just went from positive to negative interdependence.

Now, what I want you to think about is, what does all that mean for us as Americans? For what our government should do and for what we should do as citizens? Because I really believe that this is the great question of the next 50 years. If you accept the premise that we live in an interdependent world, that's it's full of positive and negative forces, that's it. I mean, that's all this terror is. After 9/11, we had a horrible terrorist incident in Bali and Indonesia. The place where-- You probably know I'm leaving tomorrow with former President Bush to go to all these countries, where we've trying to raise money to help with the tsunami relief and then next month I'm going to try to help coordinate this effort over the next two years for the UN. {APPLAUSE}

It's utterly fascinating, because the Banda Aceh in Indonesia is the center of the sparatist movement now that East Timor has become a separate country. So they're fighting and all a sudden the tsunami blows everything away, destroys the biggest city in the area and everybody forgets about it and just starts working together.

I remember when I was in a refugee camp in Turkey, after their terrible earthquake. All they were doing was bragging about how the nice Greeks were to come help them. And then the Greeks had an earthquake and the Turks went and helped them. Then there were no more earthquakes so they started fighting on over islands in the Aegean again, but they were no less interdependent. Nothing changed in the closeness of their lives and the impact they had on one another except whether it was positive or negative.

Now we're at a moment of new hope in the Middle East. We have Mahmoud Abbas, whom I know very well, declaring that in effect, as far as he's concerned for the PLO, the terrorism is a thing of the past. He wants to make peace with Israel and no matter how long it takes and whatever problems there are, he's determined not to allow any terrorist violence to come back and he's made a pretty good effort at it. And it's obvious that the current national unity government of the Prime Minister Sharon and Shamon Peres believe that because of the restraint they've shown in the face of the violence that has occurred. They always know whether they're making their best efforts to stop it.

I know this can be done. In 1998, we had the Wye River Peace Accord and a change of government, from Mr. Netanyahu to Mr. Barak. It's only the year in the entire history of the state of history where not a single Israeli citizen was killed by a terrorist attack. They got lucky but they also worked at it together, and so this is a moment of hope. So we're now back to positive interdependence. But if it turns sour again, they'll be no less dependent on one another. It'll just be negative rather than positive interdependence. So the great mission for all of us as citizens and for the governments that represent us is how to beat down the negative forces, build up the positive forces and move from a state of disequilibrium, because that's what interdependence is. You wake up in the morning not knowing whether you're going to get the good or bad.

And we just had another horrible example in the Middle East when Mr. Herari was murdered and all those other people in Lebanon. He was a good friend of mine, but-- Less than two weeks before he died, we spent an hour and a half together. It was a devastating tragedy for Lebanon. He wanted the Syrians out of there. He wanted to them to quit letting the terrorists train in the Baca Valley and he basically rebuilt Beirut after the horrible, long civil war. And it's been a very sad thing for me, for me personally, because we worked together and I knew him well.

But what we-- The model we need to be thinking about is how to do we go from the state of disequilibrium from an interdependence to a community, where we have shared responsibilities and shared benefits based on shared values, simple shared values? Everybody counts, deserves a chance, competition's good but we do better when we work together. Our differences are really important. Our religious and other differences, they are important, but our common humanity matters more. Now I see every, single issue through that prism now.

Somebody asked me what I think about the President's latest announcement in area X. You know, Social Security, economics, whatever. Everything I ask myself, “Would this bring us closer to a state of community, moving from negative to positive interdependence? Or will it move us further away from it?” And that's how I decide whether I'm for it or against it, because that's what I think our great obligations are. So what does that mean in practical terms? How might be go from a state of interdependence to a stronger community within America and a more communal atmosphere throughout the world?

Well, first we can't be naïve. We have to have a security strategy. And we don't have to go around looking for enemies, but when we have them, we have to confront them. So we have to continue to work against terror and terror networks, wherever they exist. And as I was saying a moment ago, they can exist everything. We've had these-- The horrible thing that happened in Lebanon, the attack in Bali, the attack on the train in Spain. It doesn't matter where you are now. Now, you know, terrorism is a equal opportunity striker throughout the world. People can get around. And if you're mad about something, you can get on the Internet and figure out how to make a big bomb. The technology of the bomb that destroyed so much of Beirut, shattered all those new hotels and probably wrecked their tourism industry for another year or two, was not much different from the one Timothy McVeigh used in Oklahoma City. It was just even bigger, lots bigger. And they probably had to reinforce the vehicle that brought it in so it could carry the weight, but otherwise it was really simple. Anybody in this room could figure out how to make a bomb like that.

So here we are. We have to have a security strategy. We have to keep going after these terrorist networks, and we have to confront the fact that it would be a disaster if they got a hold of chemical, biological and nuclear materials, which could be used in a weapon. I can now say this because it's been so much in the press. But if you have-- If you look at your glasses on the table. If you had just enough fissile material, and not all nuclear material is fissile. It's not all capable of using, being used in an explosive. But if you had enough to be— About the size of a large cookie, about the size of that glass, and you put it into Timothy McVeigh's bomb, a pickup truck full of fertilizer, and you figured out how to detonate it, which as I said, you can literally learn to do it on websites, it would be strong enough to take out 25% of Washington, D.C., just that little bit. So any money that your government spends trying to identify, contain and where possible, destroy chemical, biological and nuclear materials, is money well spent.

Not long before I took office the bipartisan majority of Congress passed a program called the Nunn-Luger program, which was designed to help the Russians get all the nuclear missiles in other republics of the former Soviet Union back into Russia and then put all the material from the missiles in secure sites, and eventually destroy the missiles and neutralize the materials. When I was President, we spent a lot of your money doing that. We also, at various periods, were employing up to half the people in Russia who were scientists and technologists in chemical, nuclear and biological weapons. Because I didn't want them to go to work for Iran or somebody else. The government was broke at the time and they couldn't afford to pay them. And I wished we'd have been able to keep them all working. We did a lot of good, positive things together.

This North Korea issue that is now back in the press, where the North Koreans claim they have a bomb? I'm not particularly worried about the North Koreans dropping a bomb on anybody, because if they did, they'd be toast. In other words, if deterrents work between the United States and If deterrents work between the United States and the Soviet Union, it certainly works between the United States and North Korea or Iran or anybody else. That's not what the worry is. The worry is, if you get into the bomb-making business, you're going to have a lot of this material lying around, where it can be stolen or sold. And North Korea is the most bizarre country in the world. They can't grow enough food to feed themselves but they're world-class bomb and missile makers. And they had a huge nuclear program underway when I became President and we put an end to that in '94. Then we stopped them from testing their long range missiles in '98 and we nearly made a deal to stop the whole thing. But they still had, unbeknownst to us at the time, a small nuclear program going on in the laboratory that produced enough fissile material to make maybe a bomb or two a year. The program we ended would have given them 50, 60, 70 missiles by now, nuclear warheads. So this is much smaller, but it's still troubling because of the potency of the material, as I just described to you. Every time I look at the top of a glass, I think about it now.

Now the good news is, I still think we can make a deal there. The North Koreans do not want to become like East Germany. They don't want to disappear from the scene. They want to eat and stay warm and they want to be-- And they can't grow their own food and produce their own energy and they want to be recognized as a major player in the region. And that's basically what the South Koreans have been trying to do, but it's a very difficult balancing act that the President and all of our allies have to follow now because it's not easy to get at them. A lot of their materials are buried in deep underground mountain cave laboratories. It's not like when the Israelis took out the Osirak Reactor in Iraq in 1981, for example. So the military actions are not so self-evident. We can probably work it out diplomatically but the thing has reached the stage now where we need to really kind of gear up and try to resolve it in the next year or so, because-- Not because I think they'll use it. Because I think, if you can't eat and stay warm and you can't grow your own food and you can't make anything else anybody else wants to buy, temptation is overwhelming to sell what you can sell. That's the danger in North Korea.

With Iran, it's a slightly different problem, and all the more perplexing. They claim they don't want to make a bomb but they keep making material that could be used into a bomb in their nuclear program. There are nuclear options that produce material that can never be made into a bomb. In other words, you can have nuclear power plants, so-called white-water power plants that don't produce fissile material. Most countries that see themselves on the rise have populations that overwhelmingly favor their becoming a nuclear power because they think if other people have it, why shouldn't they?
The Indians are a classic example. We've ended, over the last six years or so, a long standoff we had with India. We're on warm terms with them again, but 90% of the people in India favor India being a nuclear power, because Pakistan is. The danger is if the Indians and Pakistanis could go to war by accident, or somebody could get at one of their respective supplies. It costs a lot of money to build and maintain and secure a nuclear arsenal, and all these arguments apply with equal force but not with the same level of terror to chemical stocks, which we're doing a pretty good job of managing, and to biological agents, which are the most frightening of all because they're sort of like invisible killers and they can spread before you know what's going on. But it's harder to do than it seems.

Remember when we had the anthrax scare right after 9/11 and those five people died? There was enough anthrax in those, all those letters, enough live anthrax spores that if it had all been perfectly applied, it could have killed 100,000 people, but only five people died so it's The point I'm making is biological warfare is scary to contemplate, dangerous in theory, can be dangerous in fact, but it's harder to do than it seems. Anything your government does to spend money to try to contain and destroy these materials is money well spent.

The last thing I'll say is that I am strongly, strongly opposed to this research program, that we had a bipartisan I'm proud of this, a bipartisan majority to shut down, last year in Congress, but now the administration is tempting to revive it, to develop two new nuclear weapons. One, is a sort of so-called small-scale battlefield nuclear weapon and the other, the one that's being more urgently pushed, is designed to break deep underground concrete bunkers. Now we already have a very powerful, conventional bunker-buster weapon that will pierce bunkers probably 20 feet below the ground, under a lot of concrete. They want another one. If such a weapon had been dropped in downtown Baghdad during the recent conflict, it could have taken out 25% of the city to get one or two people below the ground.

We are in a very weak position to go around lecturing the Iranians about not developing nuclear weapons if we're trying to develop new ones. And we do not need them for our security. I think this is a terrible mistake. One of the things that People don't like it if you say one thing and do another, and if you say, “Well, we can be trusted with it but no one else can.” So my own view is that we ought to bag this thing once and for all. Diane Feinstein has been the most consistent, vocal opponent of this program since we all found out about it a couple of years ago, and I hope it will discontinued permanently. Okay, so we do have to have a security strategy.

Here's the second point I want to make. You can't have a security only strategy. Because in an interdependent world, by definition, you cannot possibly kill, jail or occupy all your adversaries, or all your potential adversaries. You might be able to beat them all in a conventional fight but there is the fact of terror. We live with it. The Israelis live with it. The Indonesians, the Spaniards, and the Lebanese have been broken by it. So if you can't kill, jail or occupy all your adversaries, sooner or later you have to have some politics. You have to try to build {COMMENT="Cell phone going off"} Somebody's got a great song on their cell phone there. {LAUGHTER} You have to try to build a world with more friends and fewer adversaries. And that's not being Pollyanna. It's not being weak. It's just simply recognizing the fact that you cannot possibly kill, jail or occupy everybody that might do something bad to you in the world we're living in. So you have to make a deal, or a series of them. And that brings me to the next point I want to make.

How would we go about doing positive things that would share the responsibilities and the benefits of the modern world? And I'll just mention them very briefly. If you want to ask any questions, we can follow-up. We know now how to help poor people in poor countries grow their economy more rapidly and how to give aid through trade and investment and give debt relief in an efficient effective way. It used to be Americans didn't want to do that because we said you'd throw money at the problem and it's all wasted and it's no good. That's not true. We know how to do that now.

In 2000, my last year as President, we gave, debt relief We made 35 countries eligible for debt relief. They were the poorest countries in the world, if they had democracies, recognized human rights and promised to put all the debt relief into education, healthcare or economic development. Uganda qualified and immediately doubled primary school enrollment. Bolivia qualified and immediately started giving comprehensive health services to 77,000 poor families that never got it before, and I could give you lots of other examples. We know how to do this.

The so-called Millennium development goals that you read about in the paper should be pursued. That's what Tony Blair's trying to do for Africa this year. He's trying to get all the rich countries in the world to promise to at least give enough money to see that these goals can be pursued in Africa. I'm just telling you, we know how to do this. And I'll give you a few more example.

In addition to the economy, there are a lot of other problems. You've got But the economy's a big deal. Half of the world's people still live on less than $2.00 a day and a billion people live on less than $1.00 a day, so when we talk about the glories of the global economy, they don't know what we are talking about. Even though the system that we have lifted more people out of poverty in the last 20 years, that never rose out before, in a comparable amount of time, in the places where the population is growing are the poorest places of the world and they think we're nuts when we talk about how the great global economy is. Half the world's people are living on less than two bucks a day.

That's why we had a big, unforeseen change in the Indian government. You remember the recent Indian election? It's amazing. The country has a per capita income of $500 a person, 550 million people voted and their system's better than ours. They vote on, with electronic voting and they have two different paper trails, separate recordings in different places. You know, we still have-- The Federal government doesn't want to spend any money to modernize our election system. It's crazy. I just don't want to get off the subject here, but it's crazy. {LAUGHTER} 

Anyway, the reason the Indians voted for a new government is not that they don't have economic success. They were having-- They were having stunning economic success, but it's basically confined to seven big high-tech areas. So India now has the biggest middle-class in the world, 300 million people, but that leaves 650 million other people that aren't part of it. In addition to that, you've got 130 million kids that never go to school, 10 million children who die every year from preventable childhood diseases, completely preventable. One in four of all deaths on earth, including things like the tsunami and terrorist attacks and heart attacks, strokes and cancers and ordinary shootings. One in four of all the deaths on earth this year will come from AIDS, TB, Malaria and infections related to diarrhea. Most of them will be little children who never got a clean glass of water. Now one in four people on earth now don't have access to clean water.

My biggest worry for the next 30-45 days in the tsunami-related areas is that all the wells were destroyed and there's a lot of fetid water pools out there and we've got to just keep working to make sure that we've got adequate water and sanitation facilities out there so you don't have cholera, dysentery and diarrhea killing a lot of kids. But the point I want to make to you is, this stuff is very inexpensive to deal with. We spent $275 billion dollars fighting terror since 9/11, $200 billion of it in Iraq. For 10% of that, 10% of that, we could double our, a year, 10% a year, we could double our assistance to the poor countries of the world to deal with these problems, and we know how to do this.

Brazil has 98% of its kids in school. Do you know why? If you're in the poorest third of the families in Brazil and you send your kid to school 85% of the time, you get a little credit card that says Bolsa Escola and you take it to the local lottery office once a month and they give 15 bucks a kid. It's the cheapest money they ever spent. They have 98% enrollment.

In Kenya, the new President abolished school fees. The poorest countries of the world in Africa, they charge the parents to send their kids to school because they have no tax base. He got rid of it. Almost overnight a million kids showed up. We spent $300 million dollars in 2000, in my last year in office, to offer children over 6 million of them a decent meal once a day in school, but they had to show up to school to get the meal. Enrollments went up by 6 million around the world, in these poor countries. We know how to do this.

We know how to do what needs to be done with AIDS. We could cut the Malaria. You've got 2-3 million people a year dying of Malaria, if we just gave them all bed nets, a lot of them, most of them would live. This is not rocket science, most of this stuff. It's very straightforward, good things, but it's-- We can do it.

The other area I think we should be much more responsible in is energy policy. I think it is really sad that the Kyoto Climate Change Accord went into affect without America participating. Now I know that I have a certain ownership there, because I helped to draft it. I know it's imperfect. It doesn't mandate that the emerging economies of China and India do anything. It doesn't mandate it, and they should have been included. But I'll explain in a minute why they weren't. I know that after the Congress fought me on it and then continued to drag their feet after I left office, the timetables cannot be met. But by not going into that system, we basically said to the whole rest of the world, “Okay, you can go be responsible about climate change, and we'll do whatever we want to do, whenever we want to do it.” Now that's no way to make a world with more partners and fewer adversaries. Particularly when America has 4% of the world's population and 20% of the world's economic output, but puts 25% of the world's greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. We are the worst offenders. Now it is true that if the Chinese and the Indians continue to do what they're doing and grow they're like growing, within 30 years, they'll be bigger offenders than we are. But that should give greater urgency to our efforts. One reason they didn't go into it is they are convinced that the only way they can get rich like we did is to put more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. In the industrial age, it was true that you couldn't get rich, stay rich and get richer without doing that. That's not true anymore.

After the first oil price shock, the young people in the audience are too young to remember this. But in the 1970's, when we had the OPEC oil price shock, within 20 years America had doubled, doubled, it's energy efficiency. And we could double it again with relatively small efforts. And I won't bore you with all the details. We did a lot of things to work on that when I was President. Furthermore, there is $1 trillion Let me say that again. That's real money. A $1 trillion dollar untapped market today for clean energy technology. It's already developed. Never mind those that are just over the horizon.

We could create hundreds of thousands, maybe even millions of high-wage jobs in America if we did it. The old energy economy of oil and coal is very well organized, very well financed, and very well connected politically. The new energy economy of solar power, hydrogen power, blended-fuel vehicles, is basically entrepreneurial, technological, under-funded and without much influence politically.

For example, for three years, in my second term, I offered the Congress a tax cut for the production or the purchase of clean energy technologies or energy conservation technologies. A 25% tax credit. And I once told Newt Gingrich I thought it was one of the most important achievements of my second term, that I had finally discovered a tax cut that he would be against. {LAUGHTER} Because it proved threatening to the old energy economy. They have massive subsidies. You know, the oil depletion allowance and all this. All I was trying to do was kind of level the playing field and get some capital in there.

But it's important that you recognize that if the United States were to go out into the world and really try to help, this would make a big difference. Let me just give you one other example. And that is good government.

I don't necessarily subscribe to the views of a lot of people, even in my own party, that we need to have a date certain for getting out of Iraq and we need to go, whatever the consequences are. I do think we need to make it clear, every single day, we're not an occupying power and we have no intention of staying permanently. But I have seen this over and over and over again, go in and win some military battle and then wind up losing the political struggle afterward because we think, “Okay, we got rid of the bad guys and they had an election. Goodbye.” Well, that's just where the-- The work is just beginning.

First of all, a democracy is more than an election in which a majority rules. You also have to have minority rights and minority participation and honest open government and enough of a bureaucracy to be effective. Every day, when I was President, there were thousands and thousands of people making decisions in the Federal government that made me look like a genius. I have no clue who they were. You know, they were improving new life-saving drugs. You know, doing thousands of other things.

Many of these countries literally are electing bright, gifted people who have nothing under them to shore them up, so that they can make a decision and nothing happens. We take very sophisticated levels of organization for granted in America, in the private and public sector. We just take it for granted. You do. You'll think about it tomorrow. As you go about your day tomorrow and you read the paper and you do-- You just think about how many times you read something and somebody says something's going to happen and you know it's going to happen, and it's going to happen not because the person talking said it, but because there's a whole organized effort of component, honest people and a system that works. There are-- These new democracies don't have that, and we can give them that. We should do more than that. It's cheaper than going to war and it has a lot more impact.

So these are the kinds of things that I think ought to be done. Now, what's that got to do with you, and me? One of the most remarkable developments-- There were two great developments when I was President that were never in the headlines and they were decades in coming, so I'm not claiming any credit for either one. I supported them both but I just did my part as my predecessors did. In the 1990's, for the first time in all human history, more than half the people on earth lived under governments they voted in, and we know that's good. Whether you approved or disapproved of the Iraq War, nobody could have failed to be moved by seeing all those people with ink on their fingers.

The second thing that happened was the rise of non-governmental organizations as important players on the world stage, in both rich countries and poor countries. The biggest NGO in America is Bill Gates Foundation. He has spent a fortune wisely and well, in Africa and now in India, trying to solve the healthcare problems of people. And millions of people are going to be better off, if for no other reason than the Vaccination Initiative he's doing. But there are also all these small ones that you've never heard of, like the Self-Employed Women's Association in India, which gives microcredit loans to village women, who then change their lives.

I visited a woman's dairy cooperative and they learned how to use digital technology to measure the quality of their milk and to stop over-supplying and they doubled their incomes. There are literally unbelievable numbers of these NGO's. Every Foundation in America is an NGO. You're an NGO. You're a Non-Governmental Organization. Every time you do a social good, as a private citizen, that's what you are. If you have a family foundation, you're an NGO.

And the last-- And this tsunami thing, it's unbelievable. We gave The United States of America, the American people, gave $400 million dollars in private giving to this thing. One-third of all the households in America gave, over half of them gave over the Internet. The average contribution was $279, but that includes all the million-dollar contributions. The mean, that is the one in the middle, contribution, was under $100. This is a stunning development. And what it means is that we can change the world in ways we could not have changed it before the age of interdependence, before the rise of technology. So the giving in the tsunami parenthetically mirrored the giving in the last presidential election, where Republicans and Democrats raised unprecedented amounts of money in small dollars over the Internet.

So what does that mean? That means that we have an obligation, to use these tools to dramatically increase our impact, not just to make ourselves feel good but to do stuff that makes sense. When I got out of office, I started working with Nelson Mandela on AIDS and we now have My Foundation negotiated an agreement to cut the cost of generic AIDS medicine by 70% and to cut the cost of AIDS testing equipment, to see if the medicine's working, by over 80%. When I started this two years ago, there were 6 million people at death's door and desperately needing the medicine. Only 300,000 people were getting it in poor countries, out of 6 million. 130,000 of them were in one country, Brazil, where the government basically pays for the medicine and they produce it at home. The whole rest of the world, only 130,000. But today, two years later, 110,000 more people are getting medicine in the countries where we got work. We think within a couple of years, 2 million more people will, because we'll have 30-60 countries buying medicine off this contract.

I was just asked by the new President of the Ukraine to go in there and work. We're working in India, China, Africa and the Caribbean, so these are things that we can do. I never had any idea I could do this. I remember one day, about six months after I left office, I looked in the mirror when I was shaving one morning and I said, “My God. I've become an NGO.” {LAUGHTER} I say this to point out that's what you can do too.

When former President Bush and I started doing this tsunami relief, we not only tried to raise more money but we tried to identify those areas where, in spite of all the generosity, the less sexy things had been overlooked, like sanitation and clean water supplies over the next six months, and to direct the money there. We became an NGO. You know, so we're going off on our little toot tomorrow night, trying to make sure we're doing what we're supposed to do. But we can do that. So you can-- You can complain about the government all you want or you can allot it all you want, but the truth is that in an interdependent world, its non-governmental organizations have to move into the cracks. And there will always be a lag between what the world needs and what the political systems of various nations will provide. Because no matter how much support there is in America for doing some of the things I talked about tonight? Most people know they'll never defeated for not doing it, as long as they build a road in the right place or do whatever else is important right in front of people. Therefore, people like us have a higher responsibility and a greater potential impact than ever before.

Now I want to make this last point. There is a philosophical underpinning to all this. You have to really believe that we are morally interconnected to buy this whole analysis. I mean, I think it's practical, but you also have to believe it. And there's a lot of encouraging developments in America that indicate we're getting a bipartisan consensus for this. President Bush got more money from the Republican Congress than I ever could have, for AIDS and for other things. They haven't spent any of it yet but I think they will finally this year. At least they got the approval for it.

You've got all these Christian fundamentalists coming in wanting to do work against poverty and that's good, but there is still a big problem in America and throughout the world in terms of whether we really believe that we're all in this together. Because the problem with fundamentalist religion turned into political doctrine is quite simple, and I will leave you with this. I've been fighting this all my life, because I was a raised a Southern Baptist in the segregated South. And what we're dealing with today is not much different than what we were dealing with 50 years ago, in philosophical terms.

If you believe, if you have a fundamentalist religious view-- That is, you think all questions were answered, all of today's questions were answered in yesterday's religious text. And all you have to do is read it right and you know the answer to any question, and that applies not only to your personal moral questions but all political questions affecting society. If you believe that, it means, number one, you can know the whole truth and if you do, by definition, people who don't agree with you are your enemy and outside the circle of the saved. That is the biggest threat to our achieving this kind of world today. And ultimately it is a form of intellectual and spiritual arrogance, I believe. You know, they all say all of us who are on the other side are arrogant and elitist and all that. That's a bunch of hogwash.

In the Torah, it says, He turns aside from a stranger might as well turn aside from the most high God. The Koran says, that Allah put different people on the earth not that they might despise one another but that they might know one another and learn from one another.

{COMMENT="Side 2"}
...Buddha, it says, you can never become fully human until you feel the arrow piercing another's body, as if it were piercing your own. The Christian New Testament says, that the greatest commandment is to love God with all your mind, heart and soul. And the second is, “like unto it, to love your neighbor as yourself.”

The greatest politician in the history of Christianity was St. Paul whose most important statement is often misused, and any of you who have been to Christian weddings, you know very often they recite this verse from, the whole thirteenth chapter of Paul's letter to the Corinthians, which ends in, “And now abide faith, hope, and love; but the greatest of these is love.” And the bride and the groom kiss and go off and live happily ever after. But the verse is not about romantic love. It's about love for your fellow human being. It's about communal caring, and above it, there's a fascinating set of language, which is the political basis for my view. Where St. Paul compares life here with life after death with God and he says, “Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face. Not I know in part, but then I shall know, even as I know.” In other words, he says, “I'm hopeless.” He says, “As long as I've been on earth, I will never have the whole truth.” Fundamentalists in every faith do not believe that.

Karen Armstrong, a former Catholic Nun, wrote a wonderful book called The Battle for God about fundamentalism within Christianity, Judaism and Islam played against the more open tradition. We cannot build a global community if we have to have an enemy. We can have enemies if they make themselves our enemies, but we can't go looking for them. We cannot build this kind of community if we believe we have the whole truth and that evidence and argument are irrelevant. We cannot build a community if we have to have demons instead of discussions.

So that's last thing I'll leave you with. I try to remind myself every day to have a more charitable attitude toward all my adversaries, because there is the slightest chance that I might be wrong about something. {LAUGHTER} And so they might they, but I can't tell them that unless I recognize it as well.

So I ask you to be optimistic about the world, whether you're Democrat or Republic, or Liberal or Conservative, to recognize that nothing happens by accident, choices are made. Consequences flow from choices. They all flow from what your worldview is. My view is the world is interdependent and we need to make it an integrated community. I think the chances are quite good that we can do it, but we have to get about the business. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
