{title} Summation and Closing Address of the Clinton Global Initiative {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} September 22, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

We have some commitments I want to announce. First, I'd like to thank Gayle Smith and remind you that a lot of the commitments that will be made in health care, and that have been made in energy and religious reconciliation, will also be a very important part of the campaign against poverty. I was recently in your adopted country of Ethiopia. You can see what a shrinking violet Gayle is. Over 20 years ago, when she was a young journalist, she went hundreds of miles alone with the rebel army in Ethiopia, writing stories about it, across the desert, and through all the waste. It's an amazing story. But they still like her a lot here.

And the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Mr. Meles, said to me, “You know, I've been studying this alternative energy thing. We can grow sugarcane as well as the Brazilians. And that's an eight-to-one conversion ratio. That's better than an ear of corn.” So he said, “What we Africans should do is become the first oil-free continent when it comes to transportation, and we should sell you our oil, which will reduce the tensions of the world, and reduce global warming, and make us have a sustainable economy.” I said, “Well, what about cellulosic fuel?” He said, “Well, if it's good, you get a four-to-one conversation ratio.” I'm sitting there talking to the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, a country with a per capita income of about $2 dollars a day, and he's got this thing down cold. And there are lots of people like that in Africa, in Asia, and in Latin America that are thinking about this. We have this preconception about what people can and cannot do to lift their spirits. So I thank you, Gayle, and all the committee, for what you've done.

I'd like to invite John Hatch, the CEO of the Foundation for International Community Assistance, but he can't be here, I don't think. But we have Scott Larkin and Fred Hochberg here. I'd like to ask them to come up. Somebody's here from this group, and this is a good commitment. I'm going to talk about it whether you're here or not. {LAUGHTER} Thank you.

FICA currently operates 38,000 banks in 21 countries. They have committed to expand into 10 new markets, including China, Brazil, Turkey, and Pakistan, to be operating 100,000 village banks within five years, serving one million people -- a commitment worth $40 million over the next five years -- to provide financial services to the poorest of the poor and to those living where there are no other formal financial institutions, and to help create community-run, community-focused credit and savings associations. As microfinance matures, the Foundation for International Community Assistance is bringing services to communities that previously were untouched, believing that microfinance can be the leading edge of a global drive to eradicate poverty. Let's give them a big hand. {APPLAUSE} You should both sign this.

Now, I'd like to ask Dr. Iqbal Surve and the Surve Family Foundation to come up. They have made a $10 million commitment over the next five years to establish the Social Entrepreneurship Foundation in South Africa to help social entrepreneurs fight poverty and encourage tolerance between diverse communities. Now, I personally am grateful for this, because I helped to establish the City Year chapter in Johannesburg in South Africa. We now have 200 young black and white South Africans working together on social entrepreneurship. The Foundation intends to support existing social entrepreneurs in their fight against poverty, especially among poor urban and rural blacks, and to promote greater tolerance, and they will convene a conference on social entrepreneurship and poverty alleviation in South Africa to begin. Thank you very, very much, Doctor. {APPLAUSE}

For personal reasons, this is one of my very favorite commitments in the whole conference. I'd like to ask Bob Johnson, the founder of BET and the CEO of RLJ Companies, Nathaniel Barnes, Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the United Nations from Liberia, Debra Lee, the CEO of BET, Rodney Slater, my former Secretary of Transportation, Cicely Tyson, Chris Tucker, Jeffrey Wright, Clarence Avant, and anybody else Bob wants to bring to come up here. {LAUGHTER} And I'll explain why they're all here. Thank you.

This is a $30 million commitment to renew the historic link between the United States African-American business community and other community leaders in Liberia. Bob Johnson has committed to lead a high-level delegation of African-American leaders to Liberia to discuss direct investment in the country with President Johnson-Sirleaf's priorities, with business leaders, doctors, engineers, lawyers, and entertainers. They commit that they will raise $30 million through direct investment and donations and establish a permanent group to work expressly on behalf of Liberia and the Liberian people, promoting investments globally.

Those of you who heard President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf at the beginning of this meeting had to have been immensely impressed with her. She was a distinguished World Bank official. She went home and presented herself as a candidate. As far as I know, she'd never run for public office before. She won a resounding victory over one of the most charismatic and famous people in her country.

But Liberia has suffered greatly as a result of 14 years of terrible war and conflict. It's going to take an exceedingly able President. My Foundation has agreed to help the President with HIV and AIDS, and I recently went to Liberia. So I called her in advance. I said -- I told her the truth -- I said Hillary had met her and been so impressed with her, I was ordered to do whatever she wished me to do. And she said, “I want you to meet with my university students.” So I met with these immensely impressive young people, all dressed up, very well turned out, asking the most penetrating questions. And then we're driving out of town, and I noticed that not 20 percent of the buildings in the capital, Monrovia, had electricity yet. I have no idea how those young people prepared themselves to look so grand under such extremely adverse circumstances.

Eighty percent of Liberians now live below the poverty line. Last year, the country only had $85 million in revenues. They have been devastated by the worst kind of oppression and looting. And the reason I love this story is that a lot of those kids I met reminded me of a young Bob Johnson, who came out of the American South and figured out how to do what he did. So Bob comes up to me after he sees the president. He says, “Is she as good as I think she is? Is she for real?” I said, “Yes, she's really something.” He said, “Well, you know, Liberia was founded by freed American slaves, and I think now we need a second African-American Diaspora to go back to Liberia and have all these rich black people lift their economy. There are just three million of them. Surely we can do it in next to no time.” So thank you very much. God bless. {APPLAUSE} Thank you. This is great.

Here's another thing I love about CGI. So Bob and I are sitting there, feeling smugly self-congratulatory, and Jeffrey says, “You know, Sierra Leone is right next door.” {LAUGHTER} And tell them what you said about fighting in the revolution.

Jeffrey Wright: Well, it was founded by freed American slaves who fought with the British during the American Revolution and ended up in Nova Scotia, and the climate was better in Sierra Leone, I think, so they ended up there.

President Clinton: That means we can get the British to help us with Sierra Leone. That's good. {LAUGHTER} Thank you. Bless you all. Thank you. {APPLAUSE}

Now I would like to ask Rob Malley to take the microphone. Rob chaired our Ethnic and Religious Conflict working group. He comes with a first hand perspective, as the Middle East and North African Program Director of the International Crisis Group. He served in my second term on our National Security Council. He was heavily involved in the Israeli/Palestinian negotiations and the 2000 Camp David Summit. And his passion for justice for the Palestinians was so great, and his reputation for fairness so immense, that he was sometimes known as the only Jewish member of the Palestinian delegation. {LAUGHTER} The floor is yours. 

{/speech}
