{title} Summation and Closing Address of the Clinton Global Initiative {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} September 22, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE}

This session will bring CGI to a close. But I can't help thinking just a moment about the commitments that were made last year that have been kept, and my gratitude for them, and the new beginnings that many of you have brought to life in the last three days.

It's hard for me to say this without a little bit of a smile, but as of now, we have 215 commitments from about twice that many people, and the value -- my staff swears -- is $7.3 billion. {APPLAUSE} I can't thank you enough for your commitments, large and small, and I ask both all the attendees here and the press not to forget that over the past year, some of our smaller dollar commitments have had some of the biggest positive human impact, and that time and talents are actually priceless gifts.

I thank you who participated in the plenaries, the smaller groups, the tabletop discussions. I'd like to thank our CGI staff and literally the hundreds of volunteers. I think they did a phenomenal job this year {APPLAUSE} , and I'd like you all to express your appreciation. I want to thank the sponsors, the participants, the moderators, the panelists, and the people who, every year, work behind the scenes to help us conceive of and put together all the discussions. An enormous amount of time and effort goes into preparing how we will structure every one of these sessions and who will participate. And it is a special burden for all those who do it, that they have to deal with me, because
I'm such a nitpicker about such things. So I thank all of them.

I thank the heads of state and government who came here. I'd like to thank our First Lady, Laura Bush, and the other dignitaries who joined us. I want to welcome and thank all the participants, those bloggers who have helped the world follow this, and over 50,000 viewers from around the world who helped to make this a truly global initiative by following it every day over the Internet.

This morning, I want to ask each of the working group chairs to share a little bit about the proceedings and about the commitments. You should know there's still a lot of activity going on. There are probably well over 100 potential commitments that will come to fruition in the next few weeks after we go home. I want to tell you about a couple of developments that have happened just in the last few hours.

First -- this is really important — I am very grateful that Google is generously offering to make available advertising or sponsorship credit of up to $480,000 a year to every NGO that makes a commitment. They can use the credits to leverage the power of the Internet to enlist volunteers, to raise funds, to disseminate information worldwide. We should thank Larry Page and Sergey Brin, who are here. Let's give them a round of applause. {APPLAUSE} Thanks, guys. It is legendary how much money these young men, who barely look old enough to shave, made when they took their company public. Most people wait until they are much, much older to begin to give away what they have made. They have already dedicated a huge amount of money to their own charitable activities, way over a billion dollars, and I thank them for that as well. {APPLAUSE}

Asha and Raj Rajaratnam, trustees of the American India Foundation, a group that I helped to start after the 2001 Gujarat earthquake, have just made a commitment of a million and a half dollars to build the capacity of the health care system in India to effectively combat the HIV/AIDS epidemic by providing increased access for pregnant women to get tested and treated for AIDS, and by reaching 100,000 vulnerable adults and children with prevention education. Our Foundation does a lot of work in India, and it's really important that groups like this get out and reach people at the grassroots level. Unfortunately, there's still a lot of stigma there. Richard Gere has reached a lot of people in the entertainment industry there to try to overcome the stigma.

When I was last there, a small family tried to commit family suicide because they were all HIV-positive, and the people they passed on the street in their little village actually thought if they were breathed on, they could be infected. So, we're making great strides. The government there has actually been quite good. But we need this kind of support. So let's thank Asha and Raj and the American India Foundation. It's important. {APPLAUSE}

This is a story about how this meeting is supposed to work. Nigel Green actually visited our commitments desk looking for a partnership opportunity. He wound up pledging $100,000 to help fund the Microcredits Summit Campaign to enroll and train the world's 20 largest microfinance institutions in measuring progress above the $1-dollar-a-day threshold. Grameen Bank and BRAC, two other organizations who have made commitments already, are on board with the Microcredits Summit idea. This is the way I wanted this to work. He showed up and said, “I want to spend some money in a way that will have a high probability of a good return in an area I care about,” and he found this project. Let's give him a round of applause. {APPLAUSE}

Working together with Americans for Informed Democracy, Jim Zogby, the President of the Arab American Institute, is committing to do four live, interactive television programs with participating audiences on four American campuses and campuses in the Arab world, to increase this very important dialogue among the young. I think this is important, as I said when we started here, commenting about the Young Arab Leaders organization, because there is a whole other Arab world out there. And if we could just get one story about that world for every two bad stories that inevitably have to be printed, because somebody's getting killed, we would all be way ahead. So thank you, Jim Zogby, and ladies and gentlemen, give him a hand. I think that's great. {APPLAUSE}

Scott Garrett, the president of Beckman Coulter, Inc., is committing at least $100,000 a year to develop a grant program for research and development of new diagnostic test methods or instruments of particular value to people living in developing countries around the world, in Africa and elsewhere. One of the really unique contributions of CGI was that we talked about the collection of infectious diseases that aren't famous, that aren't AIDS, TB, and malaria, that collectively affect tens of millions of people in developing countries all across the globe, and can be assaulted and reversed with relatively modest expenditures. This is a very important commitment, so thank you, Scott Garrett, for doing that. {APPLAUSE}

This is a commitment I love. Roger Barnett, the president of Shaklee Corporation, has made a commitment for his company to become fully carbon-neutral, 100 percent carbon-neutral, all year long, from this year through 2011. Instead of doing it by buying carbon credits -- although I like the climate exchange very much -- Shaklee intends to oversee the purchasing and installation of solar energy to provide decentralized electrification to the Millennium Villages that Dr. Jeff Sachs is doing so much to develop. Thank you very much, Roger, and thank you, Shaklee. {APPLAUSE}

Now, as I did last year, I want to call upon the working group chairs to give us a summary of what took place in each subject area and share a few more of the commitments with us, beginning with our Climate Change chair, David Sandalow, an environmental scholar with the Brookings Institute who served as Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans, Environment, and Science, Senior Director for Environmental Affairs at the National Security Council, and on the White House Council on Environmental Quality. I am personally very grateful to him for all of that service, as well as for what he did here. David, the floor is yours. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
