{title} Remarks at the American University in Dubai Commencement Exercise 2002 {/title}
{event} Commencement Exercise 2002 {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} June 11, 2002 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you very much, Your Highness, President de Masi, it's nice to meet a President who's not term-limited. {LAUGHTER} Elias, thank you for your wonderful introduction, to the Ministers and Dignitaries here, to the American Ambassador to Dubai, most importantly to the graduates in this place tonight and to their family members and friends who are in this audience. I am delighted to be back in this marvelous place. I was honored to be invited to give this address. I was so excited I was coming back, I actually persuaded my daughter to come with me and we have had a grand day in Dubai. {APPLAUSE}

I thank the Crown Prince for his support for education, for economic development, for information technology, for the IT Project, the University's new School of Engineering, for Dubai Internet City, which I toured today. I liked it so much I almost applied for a job. {LAUGHTER} Then I realized that in my advanced age, I was not qualified for most of them, {LAUGHTER} but I enjoyed it very much.

Because of the Crown Prince's efforts, Dubai is well on its way to becoming the technological center of the entire Middle East and this University would have central role to play. Universities are interesting institutions. Elias, in his introduction, mentioned the famous speech President Kennedy gave in 1962 at Yale. It was also the site of one of his best jokes. I just thought of it because you mentioned it, but President Kennedy went to Harvard and whenever you give a speech in America at an event like this, they give you an Honorary Degree and Harvard and Yale are great rivals and so Kennedy said at long last, he had gotten the best of both worlds, a Yale degree and a Harvard education. {LAUGHTER} 

Well, today, it is clear to me, that you have gotten a good education. You've learned a lot about business. You doubtless have absorbed all the possibilities of modern technology, but what I would like to say in the beginning is that beyond its commitment to education, technology and the global economy, Dubai is blazing another trail that may be even more important for the world of the 21st Century. Dubai is proving that you can be faithful to your religion, to your culture, to your traditions and still embrace diversity. This University has students from more than 60 countries. About 80% of the people in Dubai tonight were born in other lands. By coming here and learning together, you have reflected the potential of higher education not only to increase knowledge, but also to create new communities of shared values rooted in our common humanity. It is that community of shared values that I want to talk about a little tonight.

The global information age is marked by a remarkable level of interdependence, more trade, more travel, more immigration, more widely shared technology and information, a common culture. The last building I passed on my way into the university was Dubai's Hard Rock Café. But whether the forces of interdependence are used to build, as they clearly are here in Dubai and at this university or to destroy, as they were in the United States on September the 11th, or as they are in every close combat in the world from the Middle East to the line of control between India and Pakistan. In all the places good and bad in the world you see there is clearly interdependence, the real question is not whether we're bound up together in our future, but whether it's going to be a good future or a bad one. Will our interdependence be positive or negative? None of us have the option to go back in a hole to put back up the fence, to rebuild the Berlin Wall, so the question of how interdependence will work out in our lives depends upon the values we embrace and the kinds of communities we build.

For all of you, young people, fresh with your education, full of your dreams, I think that you would probably live in the most peaceful, prosperous, impressive time the world has ever known, but it really depends upon what we do with the technology, with the interdependence, with the access we all have to each other. The central conflict of the late 20th Century is that between communism and democracy, between controlled economies and free market economies. The central conflict of the early 21st Century will be between those who think about yesterday and those who focus on tomorrow, between those who seek a separate future and those who want a shared future, between those who believe communities must be exclusive and those who believe their community can be part of a larger global community.

The challenge that you face more than any other is how to move the world, your region and maybe even your own mind, from interdependence to integration, to the idea that what we see around us in Dubai everyday can reflect the future of the entire world, that there can be a global community, one that does not erase our differences, but instead allows them to flourish.

Now there are two obstacles, it seems to me, to achieving this kind of community and both of them you can have an impact on. The first is that not everybody is part of the future that you are about to enter. The world is full of paradoxes. The global economy has moved more people out of poverty in the last 20 years than ever before. Countries that are developing who have chosen openness through trade and investment have grown at 5% a year. Poor countries that have stayed closed have grown at only 1% a year, a good advertisement for the economy and the policies we see in Dubai. On the other hand, half of the world's people are still living on less than $2.00 a day; a billion people live on less than $1.00 a day; a billion people go to bed hungry tonight.

We see the same thing in education. More people are getting more education than ever before with benefits widely spread. You are Exhibit A of that. I need say no more. On the other hand, there are 130 million children in the world who never go to school at all. We see the same thing in healthcare where infant mortality is down, infant mortality is up, even in the poorest nations. Soon the sequencing of the human genome and the development of super micro-technology, nano-technology diagnostics will lead people to life expectancies well in excess of 90 years, everywhere there's a good health system.

On the other hand, 10 million children will die this year from largely preventable childhood diseases and 1 in 4 of all the people who perish on earth will die from AIDS, TB, Malaria and infections related to the fact that they don't get any clean water. So we have these problems. We see them manifest both clearly in this neighborhood in the conditions, the miserable conditions in which many Palestinians live. It's clearly a contributing factors to the Middle East conflict, which leads me to the last paradox.

Consider the political paradox of our time. We have (for the first time in history) more than half the world's people living under governments they voted for. We have more and more diversity everywhere, look around this stage tonight. All of the people who were adversaries in the cold war are actually getting along pretty well, the United States, Europe, Russia, China, and yet the biggest threat to our stability comes from the marriage of modern weapons and high technology to our oldest differences, of religion and race and tribe and ethnicity.

Now, there is an answer to these problems. We know what to do. We know that there are security strategies that will make us safer. We know that we need to have a world where we have more friends and fewer terrorists so that wealthy countries like the United States need more trade and aid and debt relief and investments in education and healthcare. We know we need to do more to help more countries do what Dubai can do, which is to have the internal capacity for positive change. But beyond all this, there is the second great obstacle that goes way beyond the money differences and the health differences and the education differences and that is the persistence in the modern world of old ideas about the meaning of life.

Fundamentalism can be found everywhere on every planet and it is not the exclusive providence of Islam. Everywhere people who are what I call fundamentalists exist. They make exclusive claims to the truth, to the future, to membership in community. In other words they say, “We have the truth, if you don't share it, then your life doesn't have value. This is the future we're going to have. You couldn't possibly be part of it. Here is our community. We think alike. We look alike. We act alike. If you don't, you're not part of our deal.”

Now, I think it's quite important to recognize not simply that you have rejected that just by your presence at this university, but that you are the exception to history's rule. For most of human history, ever since people first came out of caves in clans, we have joined together as human beings, not only to help each other within our group, but to protect ourselves against those who are not in the group. For most of human history, we have defined the meaning of our lives in both positive and negative terms. “I am glad to be a Muslim.” “I am glad to be a Baptist, and I'm thank God, I'm not one of them, whoever they are.”

For most of human history, people have had to join together to protect themselves and so it's almost built into all of us genetically that the meaning of our lives is derived not only from the positive reinforcement we get from our families, our faith, our community, but from the fact that we are not part of somebody else's.

For all the progress humanity made, we nearly destroyed the planet in the first half of the 20th Century. Tens of millions of people killed in two World Wars and vast purges in totalitarian countries. The United Nations did not even exist until 1945. The promise of the United Nations could not be fulfilled because of the cold war, which did not end until 1989, a mere 13 years ago. Now let me remind you, civilized societies with writing arose here in the Middle East a little over 6,000 years ago and we have only had the prospect of building a global community, modeled on the kind of activity you see all around you here in Dubai, for 13 years.

So I say, first of all, don't be too frustrated and disturbed by all the terrible things you see in the world, by the inability to resolve the problems in the Middle East between the Israelis and the Palestinians, by the continuing troubles between the Indians and the Pakistanis. But on the other hand, don't be complacent in the face of them.

I think it's quite interesting that India has a per capita income of $500, more or less, Pakistan about $450 and yet they have nuclear weapons and massive defense budgets. In the United States, where we have about 180 different ethnic groups, Indians and Pakistanis are both in the top ten in per capita education and income. Why? Because they look to the future, not the past. You can clap, but I hope you're clapping for the other guys as well as your crowd. {LAUGHTER} because of the point I'm trying to make.

My point is, what happened? They were released. Sure, they get the advantages of coming to America but they were released from the imprisonment of the past. Palestinians are only poor in Palestine. They have the highest per capita income of any ethnic group in Ecuador. They dominate the flower trade in Chili. They do wonderfully well in the United States. We have got to find a way to help people think anew across all the troubled regions of the world in the way you have thought anew here.

There's still Arabic on all the signs. No one had to give up his or her faith. When I walked through the hotel, some ladies shake hands with me and some don't, according to what they believe is right, as it should be. But everyone here has something to look forward tomorrow morning when the sun comes up, a reason to build, not tear down, a reason to unite, not divide.

In the Middle East, sooner or later, they will all have to decide there is no military solution to this problem. The Israeli defense forces cannot kill all the Palestinians who want their State. {APPLAUSE} Suicide bombers But suicide bombers cannot kill all the Israelis who are determined to hang onto a nation which is also recognized by the United Nations. There is no military solution here. There is no terrorist solution. We can just keep on killing people from now until the end of time but in the end, in the end, there will have to be a Palestinian State and a State of Israel. They will have to share the land and share the future. They will have to recognize each other's right to exist and right to normal relations and the rest of us will have to help deal with the Palestinian refugee problem, one which should have been dealt with long ago and help the new State to become a modern and prosperous State. But if you look at how the Palestinian people do everywhere else in the world, we should be able to do this. Now there's been so much killing, there may have to be a multinational force there and there may have to be international effort to raise far greater levels of aid than ever before and I would support the United States participating in both things. But do not minimize how important it is for Dubai to be a part of whatever happens because you are living proof that a modern Muslim, Arab State can accommodate diversity and be faithful to the faith of your ancestors and the culture that you cherish.

This is very important because the Palestinians have lived in their way so long, sometimes I feel that their acts of violence just out of rage and shame and anger, not because they have any strategic purpose whatever. Sometimes people feel so trapped they can no longer imagine a different future. Young people sometimes come up to me and they say, in America, “I want to be President when I grow up. I want to be President. How can I do it?” The first thing I tell them is, “There is a big different between wanting to do something and believing you can.” When I was a young man, once on one magical summer night, I was playing basketball and I dunked a basketball. I want to do it again, but I don't believe I can. {LAUGHTER} The Palestinians must believe they can build a different future and you can help them because you proved that it can be done. I say this to all of you young graduates, wherever you're from. You have been given a gift, you have been given a chance to come here at an important moment in history. You know things that you may take for granted that other people have never seen in this region. Share what you know and remind people of the most important quality of a truly educated person, it gives you the distance from whatever happens to you to know that whatever is going on, that you have a choice about how to react.

I will close with this. Remembering what I said, the conflict of your early adulthood will be between those who favor tomorrow and those who favor yesterday, those who want a shared future and those who demand a separate future, those who believe in only exclusive communities and those who believe that communities can include those who are different, who share such basic common commitments to cooperation and common human humanity. I leave you with this.

Nelson Mandela is a friend of mine. He was in prison for 27 years. He was beaten and abused. He never got to see his children grow up. He was separated from his wife and it destroyed his marriage. About every bad thing that could happen happened to him. So I asked him one day, I said, “You know, when you were walking to freedom for the last time, after 27 years, you said you had forgiven your oppressors. You invited your jailers to your inauguration. You put people who had jailed you in your government. But tell me the truth, Mandela, didn't you hate them?” He said, “I did, for a moment. Then I realized that they had already had me for 27 years and that if I continued to hate them, I would still be their prisoner.” {APPLAUSE} And he said, “I wanted to be free, and so I let it go.” Someone must give that speech in the Middle East.

In the mid-90's, I went to Rwanda, where 700,000 Tootsies and their sympathizers were hacked to death with machetes in 3 months, in 1995 and 4, 3 months. And I asked to meet with the victims. My wife and I were sitting there at a little round table with 6 victims and they all talked. They were all very moving. The last woman appeared to have no scars on her. She was a magnificent African woman, very serene in a beautiful dress and her time came to speak and she said, “You know, my family and I were betrayed by our neighbors when the tribal slaughter started. We have lived next to these people for 10 years. Our children played together. We celebrated occasions together and then they came for me and my family and they hacked me on the back and thought I had died.” She said, “I awoke in a pool of my own blood to see my husband and six children lying dead around me and I asked God why I had not been permitted to die and then I realized I must have been permitted to live for some reason and it could be nothing so mean as vengeance and so I spend my life trying to help us begin again.”

You have a choice. The Palestinians have a choice. The Israelis have a choice. The Indians have a choice. The Pakistanis have a choice. Every single day people behave in destructive ways pretending they do not have a choice, they do. But because you have been blessed with the opportunity to come to Dubai and this great university and to deal with all kinds of different people and hear these different perspectives, you know that.

We've got to make peace in the Middle East. We have to keep India and Pakistan from tearing each other apart and find a way for them to build a common future. We have to find a way to lift up all the world's religious traditions and give the people who've been left behind a chance to share our future. To do it, you will have to build a community like the one you've just been a part of, one that believes in tomorrow, not yesterday. One that wants to share the future, not separate it. One that wants the community rooted in our common humanity, not one that's exclusive to our own kind. We can do this.

If Mandela can do it, if that woman that lost her husband and six children can do it, you can do it, but you will have to do it. And it is not enough to want to do it, you must believe you can. Thank you and God bless you.
{APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
