{title} Remarks Day Two of the Music Center Speakers Series {/title}
{event} Day Two of the Music Center Speakers Series {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} March 3, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. {CHEERS} You better kind of cool it a little bit, or otherwise I might think I'm still in office. {CHEERS ; LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} I want to thank the sponsors of this Music Center forum for inviting me and my long-time friend, Gloria Molina for introducing me. She helped me when I ran for President in 1992 and came out early for me when only my mother thought I could win. {LAUGHTER} She stayed with me when my mother began to have doubts about {LAUGHTER} whether I could win.

I know County Supervisor Yvonne Brathwaite Burke is also here, another long-time friend of mine. Thank you for being here. I don't know what to say about John Emerson. You know, when I was President, John Emerson was known in the White House as the Secretary of California. {LAUGHTER} You had a seat at the Cabinet table. Every time I turned around he wanted money for something. {LAUGHTER} You know, the healthcare problems in L.A. County, the too many defense bases were closed in California and we needed to convert them in a hurry and give them to the communities. Then the Northridge earthquake. You know, to be fair, California had a pretty tough time after I got elected. I mean everything but the locusts visited you. {LAUGHTER} I remember one day, you know, I just kept writing checks to John. {LAUGHTER} I said, “John, what about the other 49 States?” And he said, “I don't care.” {LAUGHTER} I'm glad that he, when he came home, he prospered because, believe me, he earned it when he was working for you in the White House. He really did do a wonderful job and I'm-- I'm thrilled to be here, at his invitation.

Here's what I'd like to do tonight. We're going to have a question and answer session at the end, which quite often is more interesting to the audience then anything I have to say anyway. But I want to try to put the questions in some larger context. So what I'm going to do is, I'll mention a number of things that I won't discuss in detail and we might get into them in the question session.

But I'd like to talk a little bit about where I think America and the world are today and I how I think you should view unfolding events, and hopefully give you a framework, which will help to explain not only things that are happening that you like, but things that are happening that you don't, and perhaps give you some guidance about what we ought to do about them.

First of all, if I was asked to describe the 21st Century world in one word, it would not be “globalization” for one or two reasons. First of all, globalization to most people has an economic context. And insofar as we mean the globalization of the economy, only half the people are caught up in it and benefiting from it. One-half the world's people still live on less than $2.00 a day; a billion people still live on less than $1.00 a day; one in four people have no access to clean water. So we need a term to describe the world that encovers not only the people that are winning but the people who aren't.

The word I prefer is “interdependence.” Economically, politically, culturally and in terms of just communication, we are truly an interdependent globe. We cannot escape each other, and I could give you lots of examples.

In Bangladesh, the poorest country in South Asia, the fastest growing small business in rural villages is funded by a bank I know well, the Graemen Bank, where they finance a cell phone for one woman per rural village and then she sells time on the cell phone so the Bangladeshis can call their kin folks in America and Europe and tell them to send money home, and it's working wonderfully well. It's building small businesses and it's proving the interdependence of the globe.

The tsunami and the enormous human response to it is an example of our interdependence. By the time former President Bush and I went to Asia on our tour, the American people had pledged through their government $950,000,000 in aid, but private citizens had already given $700,000,000 in aid to the victims of the tsunami. {APPLAUSE} And they weren't mostly in big contributions, although there were some very large contributions.

A friend of mine who works for a New York financial house persuaded all of his folks, about 1,800 of them, to donate one day's profits to Tsunami Relief. They had a good day that day and we got a $3,000,000 check. They probably wished they'd picked another day but {LAUGHTER} No, really, it was wonderful. But most of the gifts were very small, because one-third of American households participated, gave something to Tsunami Relief. One third, that's stunning. Over half of them over the Internet. That's an example of our interdependence. So we use the Internet to establish our ties to people in South Asia we don't know, that we learned about because the international media did a brilliant job of telling us not only what the scope of human loss was, but what caused the tsunami, how the people were blameless and what would be taken to rebuild.

Now, here's my premise about this interdependent world. It's good, it's bad or it's both. In the 1990's, when I served as President, global interdependence helped us a great deal. We got 30% of our job growth out of international trade. We got 30% of our income growth from information technology. But interdependence can be very bad. On September the 11th, we had an archetypal example in the attacks on America of global interdependence. Terrorists, who were all born somewhere else, used the forces of interdependence. They used open borders, easy travel, easy immigration, easy access to information and technology to turn jet airplanes into chemical bombs and murder 3,000 people from 70 countries, including over 200 other Muslims. But it was a perfect example of global interdependence.

I'll give you another example, which is both good and bad. Look at the Middle East. For seven years we made progress toward peace. In 1998, Israel experienced the only year in its history when not a single Israeli citizen was killed by a terrorist incident. In the eight years in which I served, 258 Israelis were killed by terrorism with the terrorists trying all the time to interrupt the peace process, because we were Even though we didn't make a final deal, we were positively interdependent. The Israelis, the Palestinians, the people in the neighborhood, the United States and the other friends of peace.

Then Mr. Arafat rejected the peace offer I put on the table. The second Intifada started and we had four years of negative interdependence, during which time 1,100 Israelis were killed by terrorist attacks, four times as many as in the previous eight years, and over 4,000 Palestinians. The average age of the Palestinian dead was about 18. The average age of the Israeli dead was about 24. Young people continue to die, as they often do in the world, for the bullheadedness of their elders. Now, then... {APPLAUSE}

Mr. Arafat passed away and the Palestinians elected Abu Mazen as President-- Or Mahmoud Abbas, and he said as far as he was concerned, terror was a thing of the past. The war with Israel was over and he was ready to get on with building the peace. The Gaza withdrawal is proceeding. There are tons of problems out there but there's no question that we have returned to a period of positive interdependence.

Now the point I want to make to you-- You just think about it. From the time Arafat and Rabin signed that peace deal on the White House lawn in September of '93 to the present day, we went through seven good years, four horrible years, and it's getting better again. But throughout the period, the Israelis and the Palestinians were no less interdependent, whether things were going well or poorly. They simply could not escape each other. So that brings me to the next point.

Interdependence can work for us, but it is an inherently unstable condition. It is not enough to leave the world in suspended animation where we can't escape each other. We have to try to beat back the negative forces and build up the positive forces of interdependence. So I believe the great task of the 21st Century world is to build stronger, local, national and global communities that are integrated to move from interdependence to an integrated community. That requires three things: shared responsibilities, shared benefits and simple shared values. Every person counts, deserves a chance and has a responsibility. Competition is good but we all do better when we work together. Our differences are important and make life more interesting but out common humanity matters more. Basic, simple values.

Whenever any issue is presented to me, whether it's “What position should we take after the murder of my friend, Mr. Hariri in Lebanon?” Or “What should we do about Social Security?” Or “Is the prescription drug benefit a good deal?” Or “What's the long-term future of healthcare?” Whatever the issue is, now, at this point in my life, I ask myself, “Will this help to move us from an interdependent world to an integrated community?” “Will this enhance either shared responsibilities or shared benefits?” “Is it consistent with shared values?” And I see every issue through this prism. If you don't agree with that analysis, then you ought to figure out what you think the characteristics of the 21st Century world are and how you will view it, otherwise you'll go crazy with the complexity and diversity of all the stuff that's going on in the world. We all need some way to think about desperate events that allow us to synthesize them and organize them and formulate our response to them.

Now, because I believe the job of the 21st Century generation is to build an integrated global community, I think there are four or five things we Americans should be doing.

One is we do have to have a security position and a strong one, to combat terror and weapons of mass destruction. Second, we have to realize that we can't possibly jail, kill or occupy all of our enemies {LAUGHTER} so we have to {APPLAUSE} , so we also have to build a world with more partners and fewer terrorists. How do we do that? We have to fight poverty and disease and ignorance. We have to support democracies. Not just starting to have elections, but helping people make the governments work once they're in place. There are lots of places in the world where thy have good elected leaders but where they have no institutions to make free government work for the benefit of ordinary people, things that you take for granted.

Every day-- When I was President, every day there were thousands of, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of people working for the Federal government that made me look like a genius. You know, they sent out Social Security checks on time. They protected the integrity of the national forest. If there was a problem with the water quality or air quality, they got on it. They made sure there was safety in the workplace, an absence of discrimination, the fabric of American life. Most of these people I didn't know, but they did things that were consistent with my values and my policies and they made American work. And when the terrible government shutdown occurred and people lost some of those services. Or when the awful bombing of Oklahoma City occurred and people saw the personal faces of dead public servants. We were all kind of forced to realize how lucky we were that so much stuff in America seemed to operate on automatic, done by people we didn't know and took for granted. There are so many new democracies in the world that have none of that. So we have to try to build mechanisms to help democracies work and to reduce poverty, ignorance and disease.

The third thing we have to do is to have more organized cooperation through the UN, through institutions that I strongly support, like the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, or an International Criminal Court against war crimes, or the international effort to control climate degradation and global warming. Let me make this point. Whatever your position on our decision to go into Iraq, I think we now should all have two conclusions.

Number one is, whether you were for or it against it, we all should want it to work now. 58% of those people showed and voted, many of them risked their lives to do it. That's why the purple ink on their fingers has become the symbol of liberty and freedom throughout the world because they're trying, at least, to take control of their own destiny.

The second conclusion is that whether you think it was a good or bad thing, it's obviously not going to become the governing mechanism of American foreign policy, because it cost $2,000,000,000. It's tied our military down. It's gotten young guardsmen and reservists, men and women in the guards and reserves, have to go there and stay longer and risk their lives. And a lot of them have lost their livelihoods because of their service. So we obviously can't go around doing that everywhere something's going on that we don't like.

So we want it to work but it's not a very good model of how we'll do most things, which means we need more cooperation. We need a stronger UN. We need stronger, other institutions. I could give you lots of examples. In Afghanistan, one of the reasons that Mr. Karzai can succeed as President and we can at least keep a modicum of pressure on al Qaeda and the elements of the Taliban in rural life Afghanistan trying to arise again is that the only 20,000 American forces in Afghanistan are supplemented by 20,000 more from NATO.

In Lebanon, one of the things that has given heart to the Lebanese people in the street in overthrowing the Lebanese government and telling the Syrians to get out of their country, is that America's call for Lebanese interdependence has been immeasurably strengthened by the fact that France is with us, not at odds with us.

In the negotiations with Iran, the President has made it absolutely clear that he's going to give the British, the Germans and the French every chance to succeed diplomatically in convincing Iran to turn away from its nuclear program before considering any other options.

In our efforts to stop North Korea from becoming a nuclear Wal Mart and selling bombs, materials and missiles to other countries, we have got to have the help of China. That's the point I want to make to you. We have to find ways to strengthen the mechanisms of cooperation in the 21st Century world. Because whether you like or dislike what was done in Iraq, it cost $200,000,000,000. By the time it's done, we'll spend more in Iraq than we did in World War I, in constant dollars. And it's not a model that we can apply everywhere else. So to be generally effective in our foreign policy, we have to work with others in patterns of cooperation.

The fourth thing we need to recognize is that if we really want to lead the world toward peace and freedom and prosperity, we have to keep making America a better model for the world. We have to make America a place where there are more shared responsibilities, shared benefits and shared values. And we can talk more about that later, but I think that our economic policy undermines that. I think going from our balanced budget philosophy to these massive, permanent deficits again, two-thirds of which are caused by tax cuts, one-half of which go to the top 1% of the American people, are not good in a world where we ought to have shared responsibilities. I've got a {APPLAUSE} --

Let me just give you an example. I lived with a guy for four years in college, whom I still love like a brother, and stay in touch with all the time. And he was raised in a conservative Republican family. He's a devote Irish-Catholic and he's one of the most wonderful human beings I've ever knew. He's a career airline pilot. And when he was a young man, he was a pilot for the United States Marine Corp. Both of his sons are Marine officers. Both of his sons have been in combat zones in Afghanistan and Iraq. My friend's kids put their lives on the line, just like they were asked to do by their country. He doesn't make nearly as much money as I do and a lot of his taxes were spent to support those operations as we spent huge amounts of money on it.

But me, I got four tax cuts in the last four years. And I resent the fact that nobody asked me to make a contribution to America's effort against terror and just to expend the energy necessary to open the envelope containing my tax cut. That's not consistent with a world of shared responsibility and I think it's wrong. I also think it is highly questionable economics, for us to have these massive tax cuts. For the first time we've ever been involved in a military conflict that we had not one tax cut, but four. It's never happened in our history before, and how are they paid for?

Every single month they are paid for in two ways. We take the Social Security checks that middle class people turn into the government every month (and right now they're paying $150,000,000,000 a year more than we're paying out in Social Security). So they take that $150,000,000,000 and give it to people like me and put an IOU in the Social Security checking account and sometime between now and 2042 that IOU will be paid back by the taxes of middle class Americans to the Social Security Trust Fund, with interest, so that I could have a tax cut in the first decade of the 21st Century, while we were sending people into harms way in Afghanistan and Iraq. That's the first way, but it's not enough.

So then every day, the United States government goes into the international financial markets and borrows money from countries that have money instead of spend money, principally China, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Saudi Arabia. They're all loaning you money every day to cover my tax cut. And last year the deficits of the United States of America, last year, consumed over 80% of the net new savings of America, and 43% of our debt now is in the hands of non-Americans.

Now you may think that's good policy. You may think it's perfectly all right in a world where half the people in the world live on less than $2.00 a day for one of the richest countries in the world to claim 80% of the world's savings to fund Bill Clinton's tax cut. I don't. And people act like there's no connection here and these things aren't related. Brazil or Mexico, if they had our fiscal policy, they'd last about a nanosecond before their currency would collapse. Their economy would be in ruins.

And this so-called conservative economy theory, neo-conservative economic theory is that everybody has to sell in America. They have to sell their products. So it doesn't matter how we behave. We can behave worse than every other country on earth. We can be the bad boy on every street corner because our debt will always be bought by countries who want to keep our interest rates from exploding and our currency from collapsing so we can buy their exports. So of course we're making China richer every day and we're getting poorer every day but we'll have a good time while we're going down. {LAUGHTER} And it may go on forever. You can probably tell I'm pretty conservative on these fiscal matters. I think if you want to be a social liberal, you've got to a fiscal conservative, otherwise you wind up {APPLAUSE} spending all your money subsidizing the things that don't make any sense.

Now, when we had-- When the President faced a recession when he first came in office, if he had wanted a bigger tax cut for a temporary period (two or three years), I would have supported it. Because it wasn't the President's fault that the telecom market collapsed because there was overbuilding, or the NASDAQ market collapsed because not all these high-tech companies could possibly have high stock values when they never made money, just on the assumption that they were going to sold to another company, which they would make money for. It happened hundreds of times but it couldn't happen 100% of the time. And it certainly wasn't his fault that there was an economic downturn after 9/11. But to have big permanent tax cuts while we're expanding military spending, expanding Homeland Security spending, and to fund them and have them disproportionately weighted up, upscale, and to fund them from Social Security taxes of middle class that have to be repaid into the Social Security Trust Fund, and from borrowing money from countries that are a lot poorer than we are, I don't get it. And I don't think it's good economics, but I know it doesn't create a world of shared responsibilities and shared benefits. It undermines the concept of shared responsibility and shared benefits. And other countries are looking at us thinking, “Man, if I did that, they'd put me in jail.” {LAUGHTER} 

It reminded me of an old joke about two dogs watching kids break-dancing. One said to the other, “You know, if I did that, they'd worm me.” {LAUGHTER} So I think we need to think about that.

The final thing I'd like to say is this. There are things that have happened in the last 10-15 years that make you as an individual more powerful than ever before. So whether you're a Republican or Democrat, a conservative or a liberal, whatever your politics are, or whether you like a governance that's in or out, there's something you can do to affect the course of the world, to make the interdependent world more integrated.

There are things that have happened that aren't normally written up in the press. The one is the power of the Internet. I already said that, you know, that a third of American households gave money to Tsunami Relief, over half over the Internet.

The second is that in the 1990's, more than half the people of the world lived under democracies for the first time in history, and now that democratic impulse is spreading throughout the Middle East and Iraq and Lebanon reclaiming its past and the Palestinians having an honest election. It's been really moving hard ever since the fall of the Berlin Wall.

The third thing is the rise of non-governmental organizations. I had two people come up to me tonight, here, and say something about my contact, when former President Bush and I went to the tsunami-affected areas, our contacts with Save the Children and some of the other NGO's and what they're doing in Sri Lanka and Indonesia and other places. All of these things make you more powerful.

When the SARs epidemic started in Hong Kong, the Chinese government denied it for a while. Then there was an Internet revolt among young Chinese and the Chinese government turned on a dime. Now my Foundation works in China on AIDS and the Chinese government is more committed to it in a more organized way than virtually any other country we work in. Why? Because of the citizen power of the Internet in a still non-democratic country.

There is no question that people taking to the streets after the murder of Mr. Hariri and the support they received when President Bush took our Ambassador out of there, which is a great thing to do. When President Sherrock raised Cain about it and the people of the world cheered for them, have helped to hasten the day that the Syrians will be out of Lebanon and we'll have a more democratic Middle East. So people power gives you all something to do.

The Secretary General of the UN asked me to coordinate the Tsunami Relief project over the next two years and it's First of all, he just wants me to go raise more money. I know that but But you need to know that there's also a massive coordination effort for a good reason. You have national governments, international organizations and then the donor governments (like USAID there), all doing a good job. But there are now (and I'm not exaggerating) literally hundreds of citizen organizations, non-governmental organizations in the common parlance of NGO's now on the ground in these tsunami-affected areas, and it is a shimmering, stunning thing, to see all over the world. Everything from the richest one in the world, which is Bill Gates' Foundation, doing unbelievable work in healthcare, especially on AIDS in Africa and India, to small ones, like the Self-Employed Women's Association in India, a small group I work with to help create economic opportunities for poor village women. That means there's something you can do.

You can now give a small check over the Internet and know that it will have a compounding impact if other like-minded people are moved as you are. You can get involved in one of these organizations. There's something you can do. The democratization of public life has made this interdependent world more like the old Greek city states and you can be a world citizen in some way or another, and I would urge you to do it.

The final thing I want to say is I am, on balance, quite optimistic about the future. I know we've got problems with terror. I know there's lots of things going on. But the truth is, no terrorist movement ever succeeded on its own in dislodging any national government. We will defeat terror and we have to do it in a way that doesn't compromise the character of the country or the future of our children. We will beat this thing.

I'm obviously concerned about the prospect of some sort of nuclear, chemical or biological attack, but if it happens, the world will survive and we will go on, and we'll defeat that, and we have a chance to avoid it.
I'm optimistic because the whole history of the world, ever since people first walked out of caves and formed clans, the whole history of the world has been a story of moving from isolation, to interdependence, which had both cooperation and conflict, as we tried to figure out how to deal with and treat people who are different from us, to a cooperative community.

We nearly got it wrong in the 20th Century because even though there was more and more cooperation from the time human beings first stood up on the African Savanna, somewhere between 100 150,000 years ago, all the way through the 20th Century, there was also an increasing capacity of people to destroy each other with evermore powerful weapons. And we nearly got it wrong in the 20th Century. We had the Holocaust, two World Wars, the slaughters in the Soviet Union and China, but we survived. And we will continue to cooperate and come together because there is no other sensible alternate. We're going to--

This is going to be all right, if we just keep plowing ahead. But I think it helps to think about moving from interdependence to an integrated community. There will always be room for an honest debate. There'll always be room for a more liberal position, a more conservative position, maybe a zillion in between, but at least we ought to know where we're going and I think where we're going, we have to go together. And I wouldn't worry about whether we're going to get there.

Early in the Second World War, when Britain hadn't won a single battle and America wasn't in the war. Most people didn't fully understand how much President Roosevelt was doing to try to help Britain through the Lend-Lease Act and some other little, sneaky things he was doing to try to keep Hitler from running over to Europe.

Reporters taunted Winston Churchill for over a year about why America wasn't in the war. And they kept asking him, you know, “What about the United States? What about the United States?” And Churchill finally, in semi-exasperation, smiled at a reporter and said, “The United States always does the right thing, after exhausting every other alternative.” {LAUGHTER} 

That's sort of where the world is now. We're in the process of exhausting alternatives {LAUGHTER} but-- On climate change and a lot of these, but we're also doing a lot of things right. Let me remind you that, you know, the¬ In the 2000 campaign, President Bush didn't like all this nation-building stuff, {LAUGHTER} and now he's embraced it and that's good. You have the Republican, a conservative Republican President with the support of the Christian right asking for $3,000,000,000 a year to fight AIDS. That's good. That's good. {APPLAUSE}

There's a lot of good things going on here in this world, where we are coming together. And if we had a common way of looking at it, like going from interdependence to integrated community, it would be easier for us to find common ground and make more progress. So I hope what I've had to say tonight is of some help to you in your own lives and understanding and I hope that more of us will follow that path in the future. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
