{title} Remarks of President Clinton at the Lancaster Chamber of Commerce and Industry {/title}
{event} Lancaster Chamber of Commerce and Industry {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} May 4, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Thank you. You have no idea how awkward it is to be standing by yourself in front of thousands of people who believe this dinner is about strength in numbers {LAUGHTER} and I'm up here all alone. How could you do this to me? I want to thank Janelle for the introduction, your Chairman, Barry Huber, and all the officers of the Chamber for inviting me. I congratulate the award winners and the people that stood in line for a long time to get tickets. I read that Warren Kaufman and his sister, Stephanie, got up at 3:00 to stand in line.

I just want to tell you a story. When I was inaugurated Governor in January of 1983, over 22 years ago, my father-in-law had a heart attack during my inaugural address. And we rushed him to the university medical center. He had a quadruple bypass. We were terrified in the beginning, and then relieved that he was going to be all right. And when he finally came out of it and opened his eyes, I looked at him and I said, “Hugh, it wasn't that good a speech.” {LAUGHTER} So I hope when you leave here you think it was worth getting up at 3:00 in the morning for.

I also want to say that I actually have an acquaintance, at least by newspaper articles, with one of your businesses. As the leader of the Mennonite Central Committee told me tonight, Ten Thousand Villages is about to open a store in Little Rock, Arkansas, near my library. So I thank you for that. {APPLAUSE} I would also like to thank you for the work, as I said, that you have done for the tsunami victims. That's very important.

I am delighted to be back here tonight. I have had a wonderful time. I landed. It was still daylight. I got to look around. There were a few people standing outside the airport. I got outside and shook hands with them. I love this part of Pennsylvania. Since I'm in Lancaster, it's dangerous to say, but when I left the Democratic Convention as the nominee in 1992, I got on the bus and I spent my first night in York. {APPLAUSE} And I thought to myself, “Isn't it interesting that I have two towns, 30 minutes away from each other, named for the protagonist in the War of the Roses, {LAUGHTER} and we're talking about the importance of togetherness tonight. {COMMENT="He chuckles"} It's kind of like me and the Bushes running around. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE}

You know, people say the darndest things. You ought to see all the political cartoons I've got, that people have sent me, ever since former President Bush and I started working on this tsunami event. They're purely newspapers but they were almost X-rated. They were really funny. {LAUGHTER} 

Yesterday, I made an announcement, and I want to talk about seriously in a minute, about work I was going to do to fight childhood obesity, and I did it with the Republican Governor of Arkansas, and we were talking about that. But I want to talk about it seriously in minute. But this morning, there was this kid on television. Kind of a heavyset kid. He looked just like me when I was his age. And they asked him if he saw the announcement, and they said yes. And they said, “Well, what are you going to do?” He said, “I'm going to change the way I eat because I don't want to catch that obesity deal.” {LAUGHTER} Sometimes we don't quite understand how things work.

I just went with President Bush and former President Bush and the First Lady and Condi Rice to the funeral of His Holiness John Paul II, whom I liked very much. It was a moving thing, very serious, but it reminded me of a hilarious story that made the rounds in my home state of Arkansas when John Paul became the Pope back in the 70's. Back in the 70's, Arkansas and West Virginia had the highest percentage of people living in our state who were born there. Hardly anybody came, but nobody ever left, {LAUGHTER} and most of us were Southern Baptists, even guys like me, who went to a Catholic grade school, a Catholic university.

So there was this huge story making the rounds that all my priest friends liked about these two old mountain men sitting up in the Ozark Mountains on their porch rockers, and said, “You know, they're going to have to pick a new Pope.” He says, “Is that right?” And the other guy said, “Yeah.” He says, “Who are you for?” He said, “Well, I don't know who's running,” {LAUGHTER} but he said, “I kind of hope the Catholics don't get it. They've had it long enough.” {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} So, you know, lots of times we don't really understand how things work, but I've spent a lot of time trying to figure it out.

One of the great things about being a former President is…look here, this is my speech. I rewrote it on the way down here tonight. It's great. You can say whatever you want. That's the good news. {LAUGHTER} The bad news is, nobody pays attention anymore. {LAUGHTER}

So I'm just going to talk a little bit and then answer questions, but I want to try to explain what I think is going on in the world today, whether you live in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, or Lancaster, England, or halfway around the world in a country devastated by the tsunami.

Let me begin by saying how I got to where I am. When I left office, I had to decide what to do. I knew I was not a good enough golfer to go on the Senior Circuit, and I didn't play saxophone well enough anymore to play with that band over there, who were great tonight. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} And I was too much of a Calvinist just to lay down and quit, you know? So I studied what all my predecessors had done. And there were six of my predecessors at least, as President, who made a difference, a positive difference, when they left office.

John Quincy Adams, defeated after one term by Andrew Jackson, went back to the House of Representatives for eight terms. His last term at 81 was Abraham Lincoln's only term in the House, and they dedicated the Washington Monument together. But John Quincy Adams was the nation's foremost advocate for the abolition of slavery in the Congress of the United States. He arguably had a bigger impact in Congress than he did as President.

When Theodore Roosevelt left the White House as the youngest former President in history, he was three years younger than me, he started a new political movement called The New Nationalism, and argued that America had to be involved in the world. In the short run, he helped to elect one of his nemeses, Woodrow Wilson, President, because he split the vote in three ways in 1912, and he is the only third-party candidate ever to run as high as second in a Presidential race since the rise of the modern two-party system with the Republicans going on the ballot in 1856. But Theodore Roosevelt also essentially defined America's foreign policy goals, international policy, for most of the 20th Century in many ways, and had a major role, I believe, in getting us into World War I in a positive way.

Then his successor, William Howard Taft, who got beat after one term, was later put on the United States Supreme Court as Chief Justice, where he served with genuine distinction and was much happier as a Judge than he had been as President.

Herbert Hoover served one term and he was my age when he left office, 54. He lived another 34 years and, as part of his public service, led a commission that completely reorganized the Federal Civil Service under Harry Truman, a Democrat, and he really did a good job.

When President Nixon left office in much more difficult circumstances, he wound up writing six or seven books, which had a real impact on the thinking of people in public life on foreign policy and where the world was going. A month to the day before he died, he wrote me a letter about Russia, which remains perhaps the most eloquent and lucid foreign policy document I received in eight years as President.

And then, of course, Jimmy Carter, who left office a year older than I was when I left, has spent a lifetime building a non-public, a non-governmental organization, a philanthropic foundation which has cured Guinea worm in Africa, helped countries to become more self-sufficient agriculturally, supported good clean elections, and advanced human rights and tried to resolve conflicts. And he won the Nobel Prize, richly deserved for it. {APPLAUSE}

So I suppose that in their different ways, Jimmy Carter and John Quincy Adams have had the biggest impact than any of our former Presidents in their post-Presidential years. But it seemed to me that Carter's model was more appropriate. I think one member of my family in the Congress is enough, and {LAUGHTER} I don't think I'd like it very much anyway.

So I set up this Foundation to build a Library in Arkansas, my home state, which would essentially be America's first Museum of the 21st Century; would explain how we changed the way we lived and worked and related to each other in the world. And we opened it in November and we've had about 300,000 people come down there already. So I hope if you ever have a chance to go, you will, because I really tried to make it an educational institution so that people of all ages, at different levels of interest, could learn from it.

And then I decided to work on things that I cared about as President, where I could still have an influence. There are a lot of things I cared about as president that I can't have any impact on anymore, but there are some highly relevant to the 21st Century where I can, and I decided to work for economic opportunity in poor communities at home and around the world, for the resolution of religious and racial conflicts, for getting young people involved in citizen service and educational opportunities, and for health security, especially dealing with HIV and AIDS. So now my Foundation works in 20 countries all over the world, delivering AIDS medicine and care.

When I started this work, there were only 130,000 people in the entire world, in poor countries, getting AIDS medicine, outside of Brazil, where everybody gets it from the government. And today, two years later, we're giving 110,000 more people medicine. {APPLAUSE} It's really been very moving. And then the President asked his father and me to raise money for the tsunami program, and we did. Tomorrow I'm going to Texas to make an announcement with former President Bush about what we're going to do with the money the American people gave us to help over there. I hope that you'll be pleased with it. And the United Nations asked me to try to coordinate all the efforts over the next three years.

It's a mind-boggling task but I'm trying to do it because I've dealt with these disasters all my life. When I was Governor, Arkansas had the highest tornado death rate in the country. We had a massive 100-year flood. When I was president, we had a 500-year flood in the Mississippi River Valley, and we had to relocate whole towns. And I know how easy it is to forget about the misery and the suffering and losses of people as soon as they're out of the headlines, and as soon as people have been buried, and it takes years to get over this. So I'm doing what I can, and it's quite interesting.

And then yesterday we did have this announcement on fighting childhood obesity, and I want to tell you a little about that and why I decided to do it. First of all, I've always been interested in health care. I'm interested in what we can do to improve the quality and slow the increase in cost of health care. And it's clear that one of the things that you can't blame on the health insurance companies, or doctors, or hospitals, or trial lawyers, or all the various bugaboos for why we have a more expensive system than everybody else's. We made different lifestyle choices than other countries. {APPLAUSE} And a lot of people are making money out of the lifestyle choices we've made that aren't necessarily good for our kids.

Now the obesity rate among young children is triple what it was twenty years ago. It's now 16%. In the South, where I'm from, and where the poverty rate is higher and the penchant for fried foods is greater, it's 20% or more. In two Southern states it's 25%. For the first time ever, we are seeing a significant number of adolescents diagnosed with adult onset diabetes, Type II Diabetes. We have never had significant numbers of children with diabetes of this type before. It's all because of lifestyle choices that they, or their parents, or their schools, or the places they eat, made. We run the risk of (1) having the first generation of kids not to live as long as their parents did; and (2) of imposing staggering extra costs on an already fragile health care system that already costs you over 15% of our gross domestic product, when the next most expensive in the world, Canada and Switzerland, are still right at about 11, a little under. And we could talk about that until the cows come home. If you want to ask questions about it, I'll be glad to, but I don't want to say more about that.

I want to focus on this, on these kids, because there are reasons for this. Reason number one, they're getting no more exercise, at best, than they did 20 years ago. Most of them are getting less, because a lot of schools can't afford to maintain their physical education programs, and because a lot of middle-class developments have been built without sidewalks or neighborhood parks. {APPLAUSE} And so it's easier not to exercise. And besides, it's more interesting and less trouble to play video games. But it matters. Those are things that parents have to deal with.

Then the nutritional quality of school lunches has gone way down in many schools, including in my State. {APPLAUSE} And we just have to face it. The third thing is, we got vending machines in all the schools now, something we didn't have when I was a kid, and a lot of them are full of high-fat, or high-sugar foods that are designed to add pounds to these kids.

Then, this is interesting, in 1970, 30% of the American food dollar was spent eating out. Today it's 47%, and of that, over half is spent at fast-food places. Now I like a lot of those places, but let's look at what's really going on here. A lot of people don't have many choices. You've got more and more families where both parents are working. You've got people, you know, getting up early, taking their kids to school, or to child care, and food is one of the few remaining really good bargains in America, both food at the grocery store and food in restaurants and fast-food places. Compared to what other countries pay, it's a good bargain here. But the truth is, that if you go to most of these places, the portions are bigger, and the fat content and the sugar content is higher today than was the case 20 to 25 years ago. And the consequences to the bodies of our children are severe.

Now what can we do about it? Let me tell you, first of all, I agreed to do this project with the Heart Association and a bunch of doctors, but also with the Republican Governor of my home State, because I wanted to make it clear that this was not a party issue. Mike Huckabee is a friend of mine. We were both born in the same little town. About a year and a half ago he was 5'10” and weighted 280 pounds. He'd never done a lick of physical exercise in his life, and he lost 110 pounds in a year, and a few months ago ran a marathon. And he just wrote a book called, Stop Digging Your Grave With a Knife and Fork {LAUGHTER} .

As I said when we did our announcements, and I looked at his svelte figure there, I said, “You know, I devoted my whole career to trying to shrink the ranks of Republicans, but this is not how I had in mind here.” {LAUGHTER} But it's a really brave, great thing he did. He also required our state to measure the body mass index of every child in the schools and send it home confidentially to the parents, along with instructions for how they could eat more healthily and exercise. And he got rid of all vending machines in grade school, and now we're negotiating what's going to be in the ones in high schools. {APPLAUSE}

Now, I say this because you were talking about strength in numbers. This is something I recommended. Yesterday we made these announcements in a school, Public School 128, in Washington Heights, which for those of you who know New York City, is just the neighborhood just north of Harlem. In this grade school almost all the kids were African-American or Latino. A lot of them were first-generation emigrants. They do have a little gym in the school, but they have totally changed the menus, have lots more fresh fruit and vegetables in the school cafeteria than they used to. They have totally changed the way they do the curriculum and the exercise program for people generally.

And when I got there yesterday, I went into a first-grade class where the kids were writing notes to me about what they were learning about diet and lifestyle and why it was important, at six years old. And so I said, “Never mind writing it, tell me.” And they were so proud, and they were saying things that will really make a difference to the way their lives turn out. I say that because this is something we don't have to have the government to do. You can make a decision here, and every community in America can examine what's being served in the schools, examine what's being served in these vending machines. Talk to people about how food is prepared.

It's very interesting, a lot of the food chains are making a vigorous effort to change not just what they offer, not just to have healthy items on the menu, but to change the way they prepare everything. There were some major food companies last year that all their increased profits when they introduced their healthy food alternatives. We can make this good business. We don't have to demonize anybody. You know, nobody made me eat all those french fries I ate, that drove me under the knife when I had 90 percent blockage. That was a decision I made. And even though I wasn't particularly overweight, I had a genetic predisposition to high cholesterol.

But I dodged a big bullet and I was really lucky. God gave me a second chance, and this is one of the things I'm trying to do. But I want to say all this to make it clear that I think this strength-in-numbers idea is a good idea, but you've got to decide what you're going to do with your strength and your numbers. And I decided to spend a lot of the rest of my life trying to make sure that nobody younger than me is denied a chance to live their full span of years and live their dreams. And I'd like to have your help on this project in your community. I think you can do it. {APPLAUSE}

Now here's what I want to say about the world we're living in, the country we're living in, and the community you're living in. Whenever anybody talks about the 21st century world, you won't have to wait long until somebody throws around the word “globalization.” And it's a pretty good word but I don't really like it as a description of the world we live in because: (1) it implies an exclusively economic term. We do have a global economy; and (2) it ignores the changes that are going on in our communities. I prefer the word “interdependence,” because interdependence includes economic, cultural, and information technology, and all the other things that draw us closer and closer together. And it also implies increased diversity within communities and states and nations, as well as across national lines.

I also like interdependence because it's neither good nor bad necessarily. Interdependence just means we can't escape each other so we probably ought not to ignore each other. That's all it means. The Middle East is the best example. In the seven years I was president, when we worked toward peace we had positive interdependence. Then we had this Intafada and all of a sudden, in four years, four times as many Israelis were killed by terrorists as were killed in the eight years I was president, and four times that many Palestinians were killed, but they were no less interdependent when they were fighting than they were when they were working for peace. Their interdependence was the same; it just went from positive to negative.

If you look at 9/11, it's a classic example of interdependence. Horrible, negative interdependence overlaying a positive story underneath. What do I mean by that? You had these terrorists from the Middle East turn jet airplanes into big chemical weapons. That's what they were. They took airplanes that were full of jet fuel and turned them into chemical weapons and brought down the World Trade Center, attacked the Pentagon, and meant to attack another target before brave people brought that plane down here in your State. But how did those terrorists get to do that? They used the forces of interdependence that we like. They used open borders, easy immigration, easy access to information and technology, to build these chemical weapons out of jet airplanes. And the people they killed? Three thousand people from 70 countries, including over 200 other Muslims who came to America out of a sense of positive interdependence because they believed this was a place where dreams were built.

So obviously, it seems to me when we think about what do you want to do with Lancaster, Pennsylvania, America, or the world? If you believe we're interdependent, you can't escape any of those communities, so you have to try to build up the forces of positive interdependence and reduce the negative ones. To move from simple interdependence, which is good and bad and unstable, to a more integrated community atmosphere.

What makes a community? Now don't worry, I'm not talking about world government and giving up our sovereignty, but what makes a sense of community? Shared responsibilities, first. Shared benefits, second, rooted, third, in a shared sense of values. Is there any way we can have a shared sense of values in a multi-religious, multi-racial, multi-ethnic environment? I think there are, if the values are simple and incontestable enough. Everyone counts, deserves a chance, has a responsible role to play. Competition is good, but cooperation is more important. Our differences matter. They make life more interesting, and aid the search for truth, but our common humanity matters more. {APPLAUSE} That's what I think our simple set of values should be.

Now, the reason I'm saying all this is not necessarily because I think you ought to agree with me. I hope you do, but that's not the most important thing. The most important thing I have to say to you tonight is you should think about this. You should say, “How is Lancaster different than it was 20 or 30 years ago? How is Pennsylvania different? How is America different? How is the world different?” How can I describe it in a way that makes sense to me, and how can I understand it in a way that enables me to evaluate all this huge mass of information, and charges and counter-charges, and proposals and counter-proposals, on every issue under the sun that are flying at me all the time?” You don't have to agree with my formulation, but you need to know that's how I do it. And I'm a citizen now, not an office holder.

I believe we live in an interdependent world. I love my country and I want it to be better and strong and last forever, and I want its values to spread across the world. And I believe the only way to do that is to build up the forces of positive interdependence, reduce the negative ones. And I think the only way to do that is to work for a world with shared responsibilities, most important, then shared benefits and acknowledged shared values. You cannot ask me about a public issue that I will not see through that prism. I will sit here and ask myself, “Which position is most likely to advance a world and a nation in which responsibilities and benefits are shared, and those values I mentioned are reflected?”

So it helps me, it simplifies my life. It enables me to negotiate this mountain of information that we are all confronted with all the time. And if you don't like my paradigm, then figure out what yours is. But if you don't have one, life must be pretty confusing because every day you get up and there's something else in the newspaper on some other subject, and how are you supposed to keep up with it all? And yet we depend in every democracy on well-informed citizens making sound judgments, and over more than 200 years now the American people have been right more than half the time on the big issues, otherwise we wouldn't still be here as the longest-lasting democracy in human history.

And our founders had a framework: limited government but powerful enough to do the job. What was the job? To change over time to do whatever was necessary to make a more perfect union. We were talking at the dinner table tonight and I said, “Those guys that started us off were smart. They were religious enough to know we could never make a perfect country, and they were progressive enough to believe we could always be better than we are.” So instead of saying our job is to form a perfect union, or saying, “Oh, what the heck, we can't do anything,” they said, “No, we can always be a more perfect union. We can be better tomorrow than we are today.” So they had a framework. That's the way they looked at the world. But they said we can't ever do that if we give anybody too much power.

So that's what you need to do, and I think that's the most important thing. Now how would we go about building a world where we shared responsibilities and benefits more? Very briefly, I want to say this. One, security is important. We have to fight terror in all the ways it's fought and we have to fight the spread of weapons of mass destruction. We have to also be for things. I liked the President's statement that we ought to be for freedom and democracy because that's been the mission of American from the beginning and, since the end of World War II, we've been the world's beacon for it.

But I think it's important that we also fess up that we can't go to war with everybody, so we need to look like it's not fair to call him a hypocrite because we do business with people who sometimes do things we think conflict with freedom and democracy. We have to explain what that means. But if you only espoused ideals that you could perfectly live by, we'd live pretty drab lives, wouldn't we? All of us have aspirations and hopes and dreams that we can't completely live out in the present moment. So we do need that, but security is not enough. We can't relate to the rest of the world only through a negative prism, and only through telling them to do things. Why? Because if you live in a world where you can't kill, jail or occupy all your enemies, security will never be enough. You've got to make a world where you've got more friends and fewer enemies, where you make partners. {APPLAUSE} That's where partnership comes in.

Now, I say that as someone who believes in the men and women in American military. Whether you were for the Iraq War or not, you ought to want it to work now. Fifty-eight percent of those people showed up to vote. That's better than we were. We didn't have 58% of our people vote. We were bragging on ourselves in 2004, and 58% of them had that little purple ink on their hands. Took their lives in their hands. So we ought to want it to work. And we ought to try to make it work. {APPLAUSE}

But we also have to recognize that it has caused enormous strain on our military. I am quite sure there are people in this room who, they or their family members, have been severely strained by extended tours from National Guards, extended tours from Reserves, the inordinate pressures from the career military people that were over there. So we can't go to war with everybody we get mad at. We've got to have some people, some strategy, to make more friends and fewer adversaries. {APPLAUSE}

Then let me just give you an example, coming out of the tsunami, after former President Bush and I went to tour the tsunami countries, we were invited to the White House to make a report on our tour and our findings and our recommendations for what America should do. And when we walked into the Oval Office, I gave the president a poll that I had just gotten that was just conducted in Indonesia. Now, Indonesia, for those of you who don't know, is the largest Muslim country in the world; 200 million people, 98% Muslim. It's not an Arab country but it's a Muslim country.

Aceh was the hardest hit, 140,00 confirmed dead and tens of thousands of bodies still missing. The American military was brilliant. The only road in the western part of the island was destroyed. The military people came and they dropped supplies and, basically, marine and naval personnel. And the pictures were everywhere. And everybody knew that we did it for no reason other than that we wanted to help. Everybody knew there was no politics in it, no motive, nothing. Those people were dying, they were hurting, and we were trying to help.

So, you know what this poll said? The favorable opinion of America before the tsunami was 36%; afterward, 60%. The favorable opinion of Osama bin Laden in Indonesia before the tsunami was 58%; afterward, 28%. {APPLAUSE} Indonesia became the first Muslim country where a plurality of the people, by 40 to 36, answered yes to this question: Do you think America should lead the world's war against terror? Why? Not because of anything you did against terror, because of the tsunami. Because they saw all these U.S. Marines and U.S. Naval personnel saving people's lives, and helping people out of the mud, and lifting people out from under the rubble of their busted houses and comforting these children whose parents had been killed, and they did it because it was the right thing to do.

So I'll tell you, there is more than one way to manifest American power. {APPLAUSE} They love the American military because of the tsunami. Now, I'm not being naïve. If President Bush wanted to double the forces we've got in Afghanistan chasing bin Laden, I'd support it tomorrow. I'm just telling you that's not the only way to make friends, and you can't spend all your time trying to keep bad things from happening. You have got to spend some time trying to make good things happen in this life. {APPLAUSE} We cannot kill, jail or occupy all of our adversaries. So, that's first point I want to make.

The second point I want to make is, doing that is not free but it's cheaper than going to war. There are ample opportunities. Why? Because half the world's people live on less than $2.00 a day. A billion people live on less than $1.00 a day. A billion people go to bed hungry tonight after we had this good meal. A billion and a quarter people, or one-fourth of the world's population, never get a clean glass of water. Of all the people who will die on Earth this year of everything (the tsunamis, the battles, everything), one in four will perish from AIDS, TB, malaria, and infections related to diarrhea. Most of them will be little kids that never got a clean glass of water.

Now, we presently spend one-sixth of 1% of our income on foreign assistance. It used to be we thought all that money was wasted. That's not true, we know how to do this now. In my last year as President, we forgave the debts of the world's poorest nations, but only if they put the money into economic development or health care or education. In Uganda they doubled primary school enrollment and cut class size, and increased learning. In Bolivia they built a whole rural healthcare network and saved countless lives. I could give you example after example after example. We know how to do that. That's like that tsunami; every time we do something like that, it helps. So when President Bush wants to spend more money on AIDS, and wants to spend more money to meet the millennium development goals, that's good. And that's part of our security too because every time we help somebody in a smart way, instead of just foolishly throw money, trying to buy friends, but we do things that actually educate children, that we increase health care, we make a world with more partners and fewer enemies.

The third point I'd like to make, and this is a place where I've been at odds with the administration, I think that we should cooperate with others in an organized way as much as possible. I'm working at the U.N. now. I know all the bureaucratic problems there. You'd be amazed. The Secretary General of the U.N. doesn't even control have the U.N. agencies. They're independent. They got their own independent budgets. If they work together it's because they, or in the case of the tsunami, I just talked everybody into it, or they're good, well-meaning people and they want to do it. There are lots of problems. But every year untold numbers of lives are saved because of the work the United Nations does.

This Oil-for-Food scandal was terrible, but it may give you the impression that the U.N.'s in worse shape than it used to be, and that's not true. It's actually much better run today than it was ten years ago, as anyone who's ever dealt with it will tell you. So we've got to keep making it better, but we don't want to throw it over. I think that American should have stayed in the International Criminal Court because I think our soldiers were protected from political prosecutions. I think America should have stayed in the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty because we're telling the Iranians and the North Koreans they ought not to have nuclear weapons but we're trying to develop two new nuclear weapons, and we still got several thousand warheads. We can't ask other people to do things we won't do. {APPLAUSE} We've got to think about that.

Now, I think that the Kyoto Climate Change Agreement, which I helped to negotiate, and Al Gore did, was not perfect, it was flawed, but it was better than nothing. I think that we'd been better off staying in it and trying to rewrite it than getting out of it and letting the rest of the world go off in one direction while we go in another, because just about everybody knows that global warming is real.

Hillary went with {APPLAUSE} John McCain, Senator Lindsay Graham from South Carolina, and two other Republican Senators, to the northernmost village on the face of the Earth, on a Norwegian island 600 miles north of Norway, where they warn you not to go outside without a gun at night because the polar bears will get you, to study the most modern scientific data on global warming. If the world warms for the next 50 years at the rate of the last ten, we're going to lose fifty feet of Manhattan Island. We're going to lose Pacific Island nations. We're going to lose arable farmland in America. We're going to have more and more severe weather events, and it's going to have severe economic consequences. So I think we'd be better off working with other people.

Now it's kind of like the Chamber of Commerce, or the business that you operate, or the church you run, or maybe the family you're part of. I never have been in any organization in my life, including my family, which, after my daughter got to a certain age, I nearly lost every argument two to one {LAUGHTER} , where I agreed with every decision that was made and I was happy all the time. Why do we enter institutions and stay in them? Because we think we're better off in them than out of them. Because we think our lives would be impoverished if we weren't part of it.

I was thinking that when I looked at this vast array tonight, I was really impressed with the people that won those awards. They were great on the film, they were great in their interviews, but I thought to myself, {APPLAUSE} “You know, somewhere out here there is somebody who loves someone else here, who thinks they should have won one of these awards, but I bet you're not going to quit the Chamber of Commerce over it. You're going to try to get them to win next year.”

The World Trade Organization, when I was President, every now and then they'd make a decision that I thought was nutty, just as crazy as a $3.00 bill. But I never thought to get out of it because I thought if we left, we'd lose more than we did by staying in and trying to make it better.

You know, if you think about it, every church in America would fail if those of us who are members of various ones, or every religious institution, synagogue, or mosque, or you name it, temple, would fail if people left every time they had a disagreement with something that was said in the pulpit, something that was done by the governing committee. So that's something I think you all need to think about, because I think America is better off when we're at the center of all these global organizations, trying to direct and shape them, than when we're outside of them, because we need other people's help.

And then {APPLAUSE} the last thing I want to say about this is I think in order to lead the world to greater peace and prosperity we have to keep making America better. That means we have to, in this case, find what we haven't found yet, which is a new generation of high-paid jobs in America that serves the same function for this decade that information technology did for the last.

My number one candidate is in clean energy and energy conservation technology. Basically, most of the people who do this work are small business people. So this is an entrepreneurial, under-funded, under-organized, economic opportunity. The old energy economy, rooted in oil and coal, is well organized; highly bureaucratic, incredibly well funded, very politically influential, gets more tax incentives, and has blocked the transition.

If I ran an oil company today, I'd be leading the transition. I'd turn it into an energy company. If I ran an oil country today, when oil got to $50 a barrel, I'd save $10 a barrel and use it to get into solar energy, energy conservation and other things, because that's where the jobs of the future are. We cannot continue to do this energy policy we've got. We're just laying our future in the hands of other people who don't have our best interests at heart.

I proudly go to Saudi Arabia every year to try to help build a bridge to the Arab world, to try to help them to find a successful and peaceful way to transition to a more modern society. I go to the Persian Gulf and the Gulf States a lot to help them try to do that. But we can control our own energy future and generate millions of jobs doing it and change the future of America. We should be doing that. We should be facing the challenges of the baby-boom retirement. Yes, Social Security is one, but it's peanuts compared to Medicare. Medicare is a much, much, much bigger and more pressing problem {APPLAUSE} and will be more difficult to solve.

And I will say something extremely controversial with probably Republicans and Democrats, I don't like that drug bill that passed. {APPLAUSE} I think that we can help the same number of people for hundreds of billions of dollars less if we refigure it.

But the main point is, we need to do that. And we need to do it, if possible, by airing our differences clearly but not with hostility. People ask me all the time again about all this publicity I've got from traveling around with former President Bush, and the good relationship I have with the President, and I tell them, you know, that I didn't know Republicans and Democrats were supposed to hate each other until I moved to Washington. {LAUGHTER} I was a Governor for a dozen years, and every time I was on the ballot, my vote among Republicans went up. And my vote among rural Democrats went down because they didn't like my education programs.

We saw each other as people. The further away decision-makers get from real people, the more they can be turned into two-dimensional cartoons. And President Bush and I both had our experience with that. But the truth is I was in public life for a long time, and I can tell you, every now and then in America and around the world, once in a while I met a crook, once in a while I met somebody that was lazy, once in a while I met somebody that was stupid. But the overwhelming majority of people I met, who amounted to anything in politics, were smart, hard working and honest, and well-motivated, and they actually tried to do what they said they were going to do if you voted for them.

When you form that personal hostility, you can't have an honest debate about whether somebody's right or wrong in their position on the issues. And I believe that we should not run away from anything. I got mad at the Democrats when they stopped talking seriously to pro-life America about abortion and about what's the best way to reduce the number of abortions. And I don't believe we should repeal Roe v. Wade and criminalize it for doctors and scared young girls. But I think anybody that's not serious about reducing the number of abortions has not ever known anybody who has gone through the trauma of it. It's not a good thing and we should try to find ways to do it. And not because we want votes but because we want to hold the country together, and we need to see that across our differences we have some shared values.

You know, I used to have trouble. The NRA got mad at me because I banned assault weapons and I asked for the Brady Bill, but we had a million felons, fugitives and stalkers, that couldn't get handguns, and a lot of people living today because we did that. And I could get away with it because I grew up in a hunting culture and I knew which end of the gun to hold and how to load shells, and it was harder to convince people that I was trying to take their guns away, although they did a pretty good job of it from time to time. But we had the lowest crime wave. For the first time ever we had eight years of declining crime, but I never stopped trying to talk to people who were opposed to me. I never thought somebody who disagreed with me was my enemy or a bad person.

And so I hope this friendship that I've tried to establish, and the goodwill that former President Bush and I genuinely feel for each other. I've liked him for 22 years; it just escaped the notice of the press. {LAUGHTER} Some Democrat said to me, “How can you do this?” I said, “What do you mean how can I do this?” George Bush was the youngest man shot out of the sky in World War II, at 18. At 18, he risked his life for us. He was shot down. And he was Ambassador to China, head of the CIA, Vice President, spent his life serving America, and I disagree with him on more than half the issues domestically, but he's a good man, he loves our country. Besides that, he jumped out of an airplane with a parachute at 75 and 80, and I don't have the guts to do that. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 
If you really hate me and you're a Republican, how can you possibly hear what I have to say about whether we, what we should do about the deficit. I'll make that up. If you're a Democrat and you really hate the President, how can you possibly hear and engage in a sensible debate about what the proper course to follow is on Social Security? Let's assume he's wrong and we're right, how can we have the debate? You can't hear anybody you're mad at. You can't even think if you're really mad. {APPLAUSE}

And so that brings me to the last point and why I think there is strength in numbers. I am, on balance, very optimistic. For those who don't believe in evolution, or at least change in human species, you'll have to forgive me, but I believe that people first stood up on their two legs in Africa somewhere around 100,000 years ago. Ever since people came out of caves and clans, there has been two warring tendencies in the human mind. People would see somebody else that more or less looked like them, but was clearly different, and they didn't know whether they were supposed to fight and kill them or get along with them. And from that day to this, life has been a constant back and forth between increasing interdependence and cooperation, and fighting with the other.

In the 20th Century we nearly got it wrong. For two world wars, the purges in Russia, the slaughters in China and the Cultural Revolution, the Holocaust, all these millions and millions of people were killed. Because what happened is, even though people were cooperating more than ever before, technology gave us a greater capacity to murder than ever before. Always killing the other.

Then after World War II we had the Cold War. So we didn't kill each other very much anymore, although there were lots of little wars, but we didn't have a chance to really come together until the Berlin Wall fell in ‘89. Now since then, for the first time in history, more than half the world's people live under governments they voted in, ethnic cleansing was stopped in Bosnia and Kosovo, we saw eight years of progress toward peace in the Middle East, the Irish quit killing each other for the first time in 30 years. A lot of good things have happened. Yeah, we had the Rwanda genocide, but we also avoided one in Burundi, and how these countries in Africa, except for Sudan, tend to be working together.

Generally, people in the end decide they'd rather cooperate than kill because it's the only choice that makes any sense, and on balance I think it's the morally imperative choice. But in order to do it, we have to defeat fundamentalism, because fundamentalism is nothing less than you are in the possession of the whole truth. If I possess the whole truth, and you don't share it, you are, by definition, less human than I am, and therefore I don't have to regard your life as highly as mine.

So the most important statement ever made of my philosophy, my politics and my theology, can be found in the next to the last verse of the 13th chapter of I Corinthians, and the one before that. The last verse is, “And now abideth faith, hope and love, and the greatest of these is love.” You all know it. And if you're Christians, you've heard it at weddings a hundred times. Right? It shouldn't really be used that way because it's not romantic love. The Greek word is agape, it's love for your neighbor. Why is that a greater virtue than faith and hope? Because of what St. Paul says in the two verses above. When he is comparing life on Earth with all of us, all of us riffraff, all of us folks, with life in heaven with God. And what does he say? “For now I see through a glass darkly, but then, face to face, now I know in part, but then I shall know, even as I am known. And now abideth faith, hope and love, these three, but the greatest of these is love.” Love for your fellow human beings. Why? We might as well love each other because we're all seeing through a glass darkly.

Why should I be mad at George Bush, even when I think these tax cuts are nuts and I hate these deficits, and the idea of borrowing money from the Chinese to give a rich person like me a tax cut, I think, is crazy as a loon. {APPLAUSE} But why should I hate him, because I might be wrong. I might be wrong. And if I'm not wrong on that, they're sure as shooting something I'm wrong about. {LAUGHTER} And so might you.

This is easier said than done. Mohandas Gandhi, the greatest man, I think, on Earth in my lifetime, was murdered not by an angry Muslim but by a fellow Hindu because they thought he was a bad Hindu because he didn't want to punish the Muslims, he wanted India to be a home for everybody. Anwar Sadat was murdered not by an Israeli commando, but by a fellow Egyptian who thought he was a bad Muslim and a bad Egyptian because he made peace with Israel. Yitzhak Rabin, one of the best friends I ever had, and one of the greatest human beings I ever knew, was murdered, not by a Palestinian terrorist but by a young Israeli who thought he was a bad Jew and a bad Israeli because he wanted the Palestinian children to have a life of dignity and safety in their homeland, and he wanted the Jews and the, and Arabs to live in peace within Israel and within the Holy Land. And he died for it. Rafik Harini, the former Prime Minister of Lebanon who was just blown up in that big car bomb, was a friend of mine. We spent an hour and a half together not long before he died, and I just saw his son in Texas. He was killed by people who were angry at him just because he wanted his country to be free, and a home for everybody to speak their mind and say what they thought.

It's easier said than done, but in the end we're going to do this because we have no other choice. But you have to believe that you might be wrong, the other person might be right. Once you believe that, you are perfectly free to state your opinions with great conviction, knowing that you will be heard, {APPLAUSE} knowing that you will be heard because you will listen.

This is the last thing I want to tell you. I work in Africa a lot with AIDS, and I have learned to respect, more than I can say, the wisdom of poor village people there, just the way poor country people were smart when I was born in Arkansas in the ‘40s and our per capita income was about 50% of the national average, but we had a lot of people with high IQ's and big hearts and great wisdom. In the villages of north central Africa, which are-- There are a lot of them strewn along hills, and there a lot of these walking paths, the greeting there that people have is different from the standard greeting we have here. But I want you to listen to it and I want you to think about it tomorrow when you drive around town. If you meet somebody on a village pathway and they say, “Hello,” or, “How are you?” In America we'd say, “I'm fine, how are you?” That's not what they say. When somebody says hello, you reply, in English, “I see you.” You think about that. You think about how many people you hear, or move around. Whether they're your political adversaries or people that you serve you dinner in a restaurant, or people that clean up after us. All the people in the world, for whatever reason, that are around us that we never see, if we see each other. I think it is far more likely than not that the 21st Century will be the most interesting, peaceful and prosperous time in human history. Thank you very much, and God bless you. {APPLAUSE}

{/speech}
