{title} Remarks by the President at Roundtable Discussion on Long-term Care {/title}
{event} Dover Roundtable Discussion on Long-term Care {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} February 18, 1999 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} Thank you very much, Governor. To our panelists; I'd like to thank the Mayor, the numerous state legislators who are here, City Council members and county commissioners and others. I'm delighted to be back here and delighted to have a chance to meet with all of you and to hear from our panelists about an issue that I had a lot of conversations like this about in 1991 and 1992 in New Hampshire.

I came here to talk about the health care needs of our people, what we can do to address them, and the special responsibilities we have now as a result of the aging of America. As all of you know, the number of people over 65 is going up dramatically. When the baby boomers retire, we will have double the number of people over 65 we do today. And that imposes all sorts of challenges on our country, on the nation as a whole and on the states.

I want to compliment the Governor for the marvelous work that she has done here in New Hampshire, taking full advantage of our children's health program, which, as she said, was part of the Balanced Budget Act. We think it will enable us to provide health insurance to at least 5 million of the 10 million children in our country who don't have it, if the states will vigorously implement it. And New Hampshire has done a terrific job. And I also appreciate the work she's done on health access, disability and other issues. We'll talk about some of that today.

Our panelists today are going to talk about a number of the health challenges we face -- the right of patients to have proper health care -- and you talked about the right to sue. As you know, I tried very hard last year and I'm trying again now to pass federal legislation which would give people the right to seek redress from HMOs if they suffer wrongfully. We want to talk about how hard it is for small businesses still to provide coverage. We want to talk about the health care needs of the elderly and children and people with disabilities.

As I said, all of these health care needs are going to be complicated by the aging of America. They're going to be complicated by the fact that as we live longer, more and more of us will need some sort of long-term care. And that's why one of the things in our balanced budget is $1,000 tax credit to help families defray the cost of providing long-term care for elderly or disabled loved ones.

We also, because health care is improving, we'll have larger numbers of people with disabilities who deserve a chance to go to work, if they can work; to have health care; to live to the fullest of their abilities.

I believe that we need to see this in the context of a larger picture. But I would like to say just a word about the discussions that will inevitably be held about a problem that we could -- no one would have believed if we had talked about it six years ago in New Hampshire or seven years ago, and that is what to do with the surplus. {LAUGHTER} That was an inconceivable discussion in 1991 and 1992 in New Hampshire.

There are all kinds of ideas -- let me just say that because we have a challenge with the aging of America, which affects not only those who will be seniors, but their children and grandchildren -- I can tell you as the oldest of the baby boomers, one of the things that my generation is most worried about is that our aging will impose unsustainable burdens on our children and, therefore, undermine their ability to raise our grandchildren.

That's why when we talk about saving Social Security and saving Medicare for the 21st century, we're not only talking about the seniors of our country, but also the children and grandchildren of those seniors. And it's an economic necessity not only for the seniors, but for all of their children as well. And the same thing is true when you talk about doing something about long-term care.

But I'll just say that on the surplus issue, which is not primarily what I wanted to talk about today, but the first question -- you will hear all kinds of debates in the next year about what to do with the surplus. And they'll all be good ideas. But we have to ask ourselves, what should our first priority be?

My first priority doesn't take all of the surplus, but my first priority is to set aside enough money in that surplus to save Social Security and Medicare for the 21st century, strengthen Social Security by doing something about the extraordinary poverty rate among elderly women, who are increasingly living alone in their later years, and lifting the earnings limit on Social Security to help healthy seniors get what they're entitled to and still be able to work if they choose, to save Medicare and to do something to modernize Medicare that I think is terribly important.

I'll never forget the meeting I had in Nashua at the -- senior center there, with the couple that told me they missed a lot of meals every week so they could pay their medical bills. Medicare should have a prescription drug benefit. I feel very strongly about that. {APPLAUSE} And let me say again, this will cost money in the short run; it will save big money in the long run. If people can get proper medication, particularly with the dramatic advances in medical science, what you will see is there will be fewer trips to the hospital, fewer trips to the doctor, people being able to maintain their own health care.

So I hope these things will be done. If we do that, it would require us to save about 77 percent of the surplus for 15 years. And we project now we will have one now -- of course, it will be off from one year to the next. Some years we'll have good economies, some years the economy won't be so good. But there is no built-in deficit in your government anymore, so over any 10-15 year period we can pretty well predict, if we have normal economic performance, ups and downs, what the aggregate savings would be.

If we do that, let me tell you something else we can do. We will pay down the publicly held debt in this country, which was 50 percent of our annual income when I took office -- now down to 44 -- we'll pay it down to 7 percent. That's the lowest it's been since 1917, before we went into World War II. What that means is that instead of spending 14 cents of every tax dollar you send to Washington just paying interest on the debt, which is what we were doing in 1993, when I took office, we'll be only spending 2 cents of every tax dollar for interest on the debt.

So we can deal with the aging of America in a way that gets the debt down, brings interest rates down, keeps the economy going, and strengthens long-term economic health and well-being for America.

So I hope that whatever we do on all the other issues and the details of Social Security and Medicare and all that, there will be a common understanding that our first priority needs to be to keep the economy strong, deal with the aging of America, and invest in the future of this country.

Now, meanwhile, let's come back to the present day. In the balanced budget I have presented to Congress, that has nothing to do with the surplus -- in other words, whatever this debate is in the surplus is not affected by the budget I presented this year -- we do have a $1,000 tax credit for people to provide long-term to the elderly and disabled . This has become a bigger and bigger concern of Americans as more and more people provide this because they think it is the right thing to do, or because it is the only thing to do. Whether it is the right choice or the only choice, it is rarely an easy choice. And it is never cost-free.

Last summer at their annual family conference in Nashville, Vice President and Mrs. Gore talked about this whole long-term care issue a lot and we got into the development of this proposal. And now the Vice President is having forums about this all across the nation. But the basic problem is that out-of-pocket expenses even for family members providing long-term care can be quite high, and as you know, it's rarely covered by private insurance or Medicare. And for caregivers who hold a job outside the home -- which that's the vast majority of caregivers -- they may have to take unpaid leave or work fewer hours, which also is a direct drain on them.

Now, we have tried to strengthen the Medicare by cracking down on fraud and abuse; we've saved billions of dollars on that. We've extended the life of the trust fund for a decade. But in the next few years this long-term care challenge for the elderly and for the disabled is going to mushroom. So in our budget we have the $1,000 tax credit. We also have a caregiver support program to help put caregivers in touch with each other so they can help each other, and to provide technical and other support for them. And we also have taken new steps to help Medicaid pay for home and for community-based care. All of this I think is quite important.

I also believe very strongly that we should pass a national patients' bill of rights, like the one Governor Shaheen has been trying to pass here. And it's obvious why more and more people are covered by managed care. You're going to see this year the managed care insurance rates start to go up quite steeply after years of being around the rate of inflation. And I think people in managed care programs can benefit from them as long as they don't have to give up the quality of care. If you need to see a specialist, you ought to be able to see one. If you have to change jobs, you shouldn't have to change doctors in the middle of a treatment -- whether it's a chemotherapy treatment or a pregnancy or some other kind of continuing treatment. And you should not be denied the right to sue, in my judgment, if you are harmed.

There are other provisions in our patients' bill of rights; I hope we can pass that this year. I believe this is not a political issue anyplace in the world except Washington, D.C. If you took a poll in Dover, New Hampshire, I'll bet you there wouldn't be a nickel's worth of difference in the support for a patients' bill of rights among Republicans, Democrats and independents. We all get sick; we all need doctors; we all need health care. This should not be a partisan issue.

There's another bill there we're trying very hard to pass this year that would affect some of the families in this room and many in the state, and that is legislation proposed by Senator Jeffords, Senator Kennedy, Senator Roth and Senator Moynihan, that would allow people with disabilities to keep Medicaid health insurance when they go to work. I think this is very, very important.

I always remind people -- by the way, to the younger people in this audience, saving Social Security is an issue not just for seniors; a third of the money from the Social Security trust fund goes to payments to disabled Americans and payments to the surviving children and other family members of people who die prematurely. So this is something that we should never forget. When you hear all this debate on Social Security, don't forget that, that it's not just a question of what we pay in and what we get out in retirement. It's also -- we're insuring all of each other against the vicissitudes and the fortunes of life. And I think that's very important. But this bill is incredibly important.

And, finally, we've asked Congress to pass a plan that would give tax relief to help small businesses insure their employees and to help them join together and form more pools to buy more economical insurance. That is still a very large problem in our country.

When I came here in 1992, people were very concerned about the number of Americans who did not have health insurance on the job. I can tell you that the number of Americans without health insurance on the job has increased since 1992. Now we are insuring more people than we were then because we've extended the Medicare program and we want to extend it further for people with disabilities who go to work. We're going to try to get 5 million kids into the program that the Governor talked about. But we have to do everything we can to try to help small businesses to afford health insurance for their employees.

Well, those are the things that I wanted to talk about. I hope there will be broad support for them here. I hope you will tell your congressional delegation you think we ought to have a $1,000 tax credit; you think we ought to have a tax credit for small businesses to get health insurance; you support the effort to let people who are disabled keep their Medicaid health insurance when they go into the workplace; and you support the patients' bill of rights. These are some of the things that I believe we can get done this year, and I'm going to do everything I can do to it.

Now, let's hear from our panelists. I'd like to start with Beth Dixon, who is a mother of four from Concord, who spent the majority of the last year caring for her father who suffered from Alzheimer's and passed away last March. I'd like for her to tell a little bit about her story and what we could do to help people like her. 

{/speech}
