{title} Remarks at BMW Group New Zealand {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} May 27, 2002 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Jeff and Lindsey Fletcher, thank you for inviting me here. Prime Minister Clark, it was wonderful to see you again, to rekindle our friendship. Thank you for your work, Mr. Mayor and Mrs. Banks to the leader of the opposition. Ambassador Swindles and Mrs. Swindles, thank you for your service for America here. I'd- also like to thank the 55 people in New Zealand who can afford this new BMW here {CHEERS ; LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} for coming to dinner tonight. I was beginning to think I'd come all this long way and wouldn't find them. {LAUGHTER} 

I knew Paul Holmes(?) could afford a BMW. {LAUGHTER} You know, when I was a boy, actually I My uncle and my step-father both owned Buick dealerships, when I was a little boy. The first work I ever did was under the belly of a car. I learned how to change the oil and adjust the wheels. It was hard, dirty work. It was really good preparation for politics. {LAUGHTER} All the kids in my hometown, we sort of thought that our success in life would be measured if we could ever afford a BMW. Now with this 7 series, we're still asking the same question. {LAUGHTER} Actually this is a great car. {LAUGHTER} If you've ever driven a BMW, the only thing is you have the feeling that it's driving itself {LAUGHTER} and you can be a total idiot and still succeed at doing that. {LAUGHTER} 
I want to thank you too, seriously Jeff and all your people at BMW for the work you do with the Cure Kids program and the work you're doing on childhood leukemia. For personal reasons, that means a lot to me and when I was President, we put a lot of money into that endeavor, so thank you for making another contribution to that endeavor as a result of tonight as well.

As has already been said, I came to New Zealand once before, back when I had that other job. {LAUGHTER} And we had an APEC meeting in 1999. Actually, this Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Group has been meeting for years and years and years but when I took office What was that about? When I took office in 1993, the leaders had never met. So these poor people came together and they worked every year and then everyone ignored what they did, so I decided that we should start having the leaders of the Asia-Pacific region meet. We met first in Seattle, Washington and Hillary accused me of devising a devilish plot to give me an excuse to go to all these countries I wanted to visit because then we never had to host it again, and for 7 years I got to go out and see the world. {LAUGHTER} 
In 1989, I got to come to New Zealand. I had a wonderful trip. Hillary and Chelsea came with me and like all Americans I've ever known, I fell in love with the people and with the beauty of the place and I'm very glad to be back. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} I learned a lot of things when I was here last. We were in Queenstown, {SPONTANEOUS-DEMONSTRATION} I heard that you originated bungee-jumping and several of staff tried it. They wanted me to try it too {LAUGHTER} but I told them I didn't want to try it. It was too much like being President. {LAUGHTER} You know, everybody watches you take a flying leap into the unknown, {LAUGHTER} and half the people are hoping the strap will break on the way down. {LAUGHTER} There are a lot of ups and downs and even the bad jumps are pretty exhilarating. {LAUGHTER} So I've had a good time. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} And if you don't break your back, the only thing left to break is your spirit so you just kind of keep going. {LAUGHTER} 
Let me say on a more serious note, I am very grateful for the decades and decades of friendship and partnership shared by the people of the United States and New Zealand, the work we have done together in fighting for freedom and working for more open trade and advancing the cause of human rights. Last week, Prime Minister Clark and I were in East Timor to celebrate the Independence Day of the very first new nation of the 21st Century.

I am grateful that New Zealand joined Australia, the other Ausion countries and the United States in committing our forces to provide stability and security to the people of East Timor, so long beleaguered, so often bloodied, so terribly destroyed and impoverished by the events of the last several years. We have given them a chance now to have their freedom, and their children, their future. It could not have been done without the work that was done here and by your neighbors in Australia, and I am very grateful for it and glad I could play a small role in it.

I also want to thank you for something else that's a particular favorite of mine and that is for providing us a home base here for our program in Antarctica. We have a big operation that runs out of Christ Church and I learned when I was here last time that down on the Ross Ice Shelf, the pub at your Scott Base is occasionally a destination for Americans who work nearby at McMurdough Station. Indeed, every Thursday night, is American Night at the South Pole. Now you know when two different nations can have people drinking beer when it's 25 below zero, they must have something in common. {LAUGHTER} 
Let me say to all of you, they do a lot of important things down there and we should be very serious in our support of them. Just a few months ago, an enormous chunk of the Ice Shelf broke off providing fresh evidence of the reality of global warming and the urgency of crafting an adequate response that will enable us to sustain economic growth and the environment in this new century. So I thank you for giving us a chance to do our work down there with you.

I'd also like to thank BMW not only for making the world's greatest cars of today, but for trying to make the automobiles of tomorrow in an environmentally responsible way. BMW has done a lot of work on hydrogen-powered engines and when I was President, we sponsored with the big American automakers and the Vice President then, Al Gore, something called the Partnership for the Next Generation Vehicles.

About a third of all the greenhouse gas omissions in world come out of transportation from cars and trucks. We are just on the cusp of developing not simply higher mileage engines, blended fuels (engines running on electricity and oil), compressed natural gas, fuel cells, hydrogen powered engines. All these things together can make a third of this problem go away and this is a big deal. So I want to say this because I really appreciate what BMW is doing and I think the United States should have done more than we did when I was President and if I could have persuaded the Congress the global warming was real instead of some subversive plot to make us poor, we would have done more. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} This is a big deal and all of you should know this. You know, I think we should support companies that are looking out for our future as well as our present.

If the climate of the earth warms for the next 50 years at the rate of the last 10, you will lose whole island nations in the Pacific. We will lose 50 feet of Manhattan Island, where I go to work everyday, and the Florida everglades I worked so hard to save, but most importantly, agriculture production will be disrupted in vast expanses of the globe. Farmers won't be able to grow food anymore in places and that will create tens of millions of food refugees and all kinds of fertile fields for terrorists and disruption, so this is a big deal.

You just remember that when you read in the paper that BMW has created an engine that doesn't omit any greenhouse gas omissions, because it uses hydrogen or it gets 80-100 miles to the gallon, this is one-third of this problem, is in transportation. It is now no longer true that you have to put more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere to get rich, stay rich or grow richer. But we're going to have to prove that we can do it in an economic way and I think the auto companies are going to have to lead the way, so I thank you for doing that. That was an unsolicited statement of support. Thank you very much. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} 
Now, we're all having a good time. The music was great. The greeting I got was great. It was like a lot of things that have happened to me in my life. When that fellow approached me, I couldn't tell whether he wanted peace or war. {LAUGHTER} Then I was taking my instructions from the wonderful woman who led me in and participated in the greeting and she said, she said it was all about peace and then she said, “He's going to drop a leaf on the ground and you have to get down and pick it up, but don't take your eye off of him.” {LAUGHTER} I said, “Well, that's hardly designed to increase my confidence,” you know? {LAUGHTER} I say that I'm going to come back to that in a minute.

I want you to remember the ceremony we saw tonight. What did it mean? Someone from the tribe of the people who were shouting and carrying the spear looking at me as a stranger vouched for me. Then I, a person to be perhaps feared, maybe distrusted and certainly questioned, could be accepted. What did this ritual tell us about human behavior throughout history?

The second question I want to ask you is, what does the presence of a great German automobile company in New Zealand, celebrating a new car of global quality and significance being sold in New Zealand in a global economy On the one hand, what does this event that we're here to celebrate tell us about the modern world, as opposed to what happened to America on September the 11th, where 3,100 people were killed from 70 countries? The answer is, they both tell us the same thing. That we live in a highly interdependent world where we have collapsed borders and shortened distances and spread information and technology to a degree never before known in history. But this world, while interdependent, is not yet an integrated global community. So if you take your barriers down and you claim the benefits of taking the barriers down, if you let people move around in a hurry in a way they used to not be able to do. If anybody can get on the Internet and find out anything or show up at a flight school and find out how to fly a jet airplane. If you claim all those benefits but you haven't built a global community, then you have to shoulder the risks as well.

You can't have a world without walls and only claim the benefits and say, “I don't want the burdens. I don't want the risks.” So these two things tell us the same thing, that the world is interdependent but not yet an integrated community. I honestly believe the great challenge of the next couple of decades will be to move the world from interdependence to integration, to defeat the forces of destruction and chaos. I think we can do it but it won't be easy.

There is clearly a security strategy to all this and I support very strongly this effort to limit terrorism, a strategy focused on preventing it and punishing it. It's sort of the international organized crime of the day, so I think it's important to finish what's being done in Afghanistan. I think it's important to limit the production and access of chemical, biological and small nuclear weapons. It's important to stop North Korea from building missiles they would sell to people who might send them to you or to us. It's important to help other countries from the Philippines and Indonesia, to Columbia and our backyard in America, or to the African States facing tribal conflicts to defend themselves against terrorism.

It's important to increase our international cooperation. All that is very, very important, but it will not give you the world you want for your kids. Prevent and punish has never been enough. We also have to make a world with more partners and fewer terrorists. Australia, New Zealand, China and the United States were Allies in World War II. At the end of World War II, there were some pretty smart people in the saddle. Harry Truman and George Marshall and out in Japan, Douglas MacArthur in the United States said, “We spent the first half of this century fighting and after World War I, we just walked away from the world and low and behold, what do we get for walking away? A global Depression and World War II. So why don't we take just a little more money to try to build a world with more friends and avoid World War III? Why don't we establish some institutions to give some other people a chance to grow wealthier and more prosperous and more secure and that give us a way of resolving our difficulties peacefully?”

So we had, in the year of my birth, the Marshall Plan, the United Nations, NATO, the international financial institutions and then a global trading system developed. Not as sexy as winning a war. It sounds like If you're young, you may not know about this and if you're my age, you may have taken it for granted. But this was nothing to take for granted. All this was revolutionary. That people who won a war would actually take some of their taxpayers' money and spend it in the countries they had just defeated. We're not talking about countries that were ruled by nice people. Hitler butchered over 6 million Jews and God knows how many other people. The Japanese POW camps were legendary for their ruthlessness. MacArthur was up here saying, “Spend money. Build democracy. Make friends. Give their children a chance to become friends with our children, to be partners with our children.”

This was a radical idea at the time. But it made the world that I grew up in, and enabled me to live my dreams and build my family and raise my daughter. What happened in that world? We never had World War III, and the forces of freedom and free markets won the cold war. All the enemies in World War II and the enemies in the cold war were all cooperating with one another again. We have to do something like that now to build a world with more partners and fewer terrorists, because the world is full of paradoxes that feed anger and humiliation and abasement.

I'll just mention 4 remarkable paradoxes. One is the global economy has lifted more people out of poverty in the last 20 years then at any time in history. So all these protestors against globalization who say the global economy caused poverty, are wrong. They're factually wrong. Countries who have chosen openness to trade and investment have grown at 5% a year for the last 20 years. Poor countries that have chosen to remain closed have grown at 1%. On the other hand, the protestors are right that the global economy hasn't solved all the problems. Half the world's people live on less than $2.00 a day. A billion people on less than $1.00 a day. A billion people will go to bed hungry tonight. Think about that when you go home after this wonderful dinner.

Consider the social paradoxes. Life expectancy is up and infant mortality is down, even in the poorest countries but 10 million children will die of preventable childhood diseases this year and 1 in 4 of all the people who die on earth will die of AIDS, TB, Malaria and infections related to diarrhea, almost all of them little bitty kids that never got a clean glass of water. There are more benefits to education than ever before, even in poor countries. Every year of schooling in a poor country adds 10% to the annual income of the boy or girl who gets it. And yet there are 130 million kids in this world who never go to school at all.

Consider the political paradoxes. I already said all of our political adversaries are cooperating with us now. I had the honor of being President when for the first time in all of human history, more than half the world's people lived under governments of their own choosing and all democracies of any economic success were growing more diverse, as New Zealand and America have and yet the biggest threat to the peace of the world is high tech terrorism, the marriage of modern weapons to the most ancient hatreds, rooted in race, religion, ethnicity and tribal.

So what do we do? Well, we have to keep moving from interdependence to integration. There should be more trade. There should be a new trade ground. We should integrate the world more closely. We should honor the decisions of the World Trade Organization panels, whether we agree with them or not. Those of us, like America who are wealthy, should set a good example.

Secondly, there should be more aid. My country gives the smallest percentage of its aid of any country in the world, any rich country? The smallest percentage of its budget in aid. But you should know, you should not blame the American people for this. They think we're giving more than we are. Every poll shows Americans think that we spend between 10 and 15% of our budget on foreign aid and they think we should spend 3-5%. I agree with them. The problem is we spend less than 1%. So this is something that when all of you come to America, you could help by just telling us that. We actually don't know.

One of the things I learned when I was in office is, even if you're President, just because you're talking doesn't mean anybody else is listening. {LAUGHTER} If you've ever raised a child, you know that too. {LAUGHTER} Just because you're talking, doesn't mean anybody's listening. {LAUGHTER} I talked about this till I was blue in the face and it was a giant yawner for most people before September the 11th. Now people are ready to listen and learn. So most Americans think we give more than we do and most people think foreign aid is not effectively spent. That's wrong on both counts, but you can't blame people for what they don't know.

Now President Bush just went to Monterey and said we're going to increase from $10 to $15 billion, our annual giving over the next 4 years and that's a good first step and I applaud it. But we'll still be spending slightly less than we were as a percentage of our income in '95. We have to do better. In 2000, we had this big initiative to forgive the debt of the poorest countries in the world. 25 of them have qualified. It's been a breathtaking success. Why? Because they couldn't get the money unless they spent it on education, healthcare or development. Uganda, to take one example, doubled primary school enrollment and cut their class sizes in one year. So we should do more of that.

And the third thing we should do is continue to be a force for peace and I'll just give 2 examples that are fueling the terrorist problems in the neighborhood of Afghanistan and all over the world. The first and most important is the problem between the Israelis and the Palestinians in the Middle East. A lot of people put a lot of time in trying to make the peace and I think Mr. Arafat made a terrible mistake to turn down the agreement that then Prime Minister Barak agreed to in December of 2000, but that's water under the bridge. The United States has to stay involved and everybody else in the world has to want that to be resolved and at least limited in scope.

I can tell you. I just got back from a big tour of Asia. Every place the people are worried about terrorism. From the Philippines, to Indonesia, any other place in the world, the open sore of this continuing conflict is being used to whip up young people around the world into thinking it's okay to kill other people. It isn't okay and the more we all try to make peace there in fair and just way, the closer we'll come.

The second big problem is between India and Pakistan, something which I know gets a lot of publicity out here but it's just crazy. You should know that, of the 180 plus groups in America, Indies and Pakistanis rank both in the top 10 in per capita education and income. They aren't poor anywhere but the Indian subcontinent. One reason is they persist in spending fabulous amounts of their budgets on defense and building nuclear weapons, when they both have a per capita income hovering around $500. It's crazy. India, a little over $500; Pakistan, a little over $400. And the rest of us have to do whatever we can to convince people that they shouldn't kill each other, or spend a lot of money acting like they're going to. In a place that could become a great engine of economic growth in the way that would be a direct benefit to the people of New Zealand 20, 30, 40 years from now. So I think it's important that we have a political strategy to build a world with more partners and fewer terrorists.

Here's the last point I want to make. Go back to the ceremony. This is harder then it sounds, but you shouldn't be discouraged. We cannot do this unless the dominant political philosophy of the world is that we should have a global community that operates on basic rules. Everybody counts, everybody's got a role to play. We all do better when we work together and one core value, our differences are important but our common humanity matters more. A simple core value.

Now, it's easy for me to say that. It's easy for you to say yes. I mean, look around here. We're all here at this nice dinner and we all laughed when we acted like only 55 people could afford a BMW, but the truth is compared to most of the people who have ever lived in the whole history of the world, we're all doing pretty well. We've been blessed. We're the winners in the global economy of the early 21st Century. But if you look at the whole history of human affairs, people have behaved with a worldview that was more like that one the terrorists share.

Depending on how you read the architectural evidence, people have been on the earth somewhere between 50 and 100,000 years. Civilization, a little over 6,000 years old, people gathering in cities and dividing labor and working together. So we make a whole lot of progress, but for most of that time, we organized ourselves just the way people did when they came out of the caves and clans. We love our crowd but we don't love people who aren't in our crowd. They probably want to hurt us. Maybe we ought to hurt them before they hurt us. For all the progress of humanity, we nearly destroyed ourselves in two World Wars and the slaughters of communist governments, mostly in the Soviet Union in the first 50 years of this last century. We nearly took ourselves out as a human race.

The whole idea of a global community was never formalized in the United Nations until 1945, that's less than 60 years ago. It did not become possible to do until India Excuse me, until China decided to reach out to the rest of the world in the 1970's and the Soviet Union and the Berlin Wall fell in 1989. So in spite of all this happy talk about global cooperation, it has never been a real possibility until 13 years ago. Humanity has been here tens of thousands of years. Civilization's been here slightly over 6,000 years. We've had a chance to do what we all say we believe should be done for 13 years.

Now, the good news is that means you shouldn't panic when people do stupid things in the world that don't make any sense in the light of a global community, because they haven't had a lot of practice at this. If you remember the ceremony we saw when I came in, these people were at least giving me a chance to demonstrate my good faith. But the presumption was that I could not be trusted because I was not in the group. We can learn a lot from remembering what we saw here, and yet they gave me a chance to prove that I could be a part of a larger community of peace-loving people. That's what picking up that leaf was all about.

Now, what's that got to do with what's going on? Think about bin Laden and his crowd. They're actually behaving according to ideas that many people have shared throughout history, probably most people. We have the truth. If you share our truth, you're part of our community. If you don't, you're a legitimate target, even if you're just a 6-year-old girl going to work with her mother at the World Trade Center on the morning of September the 11th. If you share our truth, you're part of our community, which is composed of people who think alike and act alike. If you're not prepared to think and act like we do, it's inconceivable that we have anything in common, so either get out of our way or we'll come after you. That's the way most of the people have looked at the world throughout most of history.

They weren't all terrorists. Sometimes they lived in the cold peace, but there was us and them, us and them. Then all of a sudden all these things began to happen as the world got smaller and societies got more diverse. You'd don't ask anybody in New Zealand who's of a different racial or religious or ethnic group to change the color of their skin or their pride and their parents and their grandparents, or the way they practice their faith. What you say is, “I honor that, but the only way it can work is if you honor my ability to do the same thing.” And the only way that ever really happens is if you say, “Our differences are really important but our common humanity matters more.”

It sounds self-evident, but look what's happened in my lifetime. The greatest person to live in my lifetime, I believe, was Ghandi. Ghandi worked for decades in peace, was abused, imprisoned. He could have been killed repeatedly. Spinning cotton on his little cotton gin. Finally His little spinning wheel, I mean. Finally, India is free and what happens? He gets murdered. By whom? Another Hindu. Not a Muslim, another Hindu. How come? Because the young man who killed him thought he was a Heretic. He thought he was a bad Hindu and a bad Indian because he wanted India for the Muslims too, and the Jains and the Sikhs and the Buddhists and the Christians and the Jews. India's got more religions then the rest of us do put together. And Ghandi thought they should all have a home there, so this kid killed him.

Then, when I was a senior in college, in the space of 3 months, in my country, the greatest American in my lifetime, Martin Luther King and my favorite politician, Robert Kennedy were both murdered inside of 3 months, because they were trying to reconcile the American people to each other and their killers did not want to reconciliation.

Then in the Middle East, who got killed first? Sadat. Why? Who killed Sadat? An Israeli Commando. No, another Egyptian. Why? The kid thought he was a bad Egyptian and a bad Muslim because he wanted a secular government for Egypt and peace with Israel.

And on what was maybe the darkest day of my presidency, my friend, Yitzhak Rabin (whom I loved as much as I ever loved another man in my whole life) was murdered by a young Israeli who thought he was a bad Jew and a bad Israeli because he wanted to lay down a lifetime of fighting and give the Palestinian children their homeland and find security for Israel by accepting the other, by sharing the future and the truth and having a bigger version of community. This is harder than it sounds, but you shouldn't be discouraged because we haven't been at it very long.

Now let's close with this story. I want you to think about this. When you see people making a fool of themselves at the World Cup (it starts in 4 days), I want you to think about this. The World Cup is the greatest media event in the world and yet we have a few soccer riots every year. Why? Because people revert to the old way. They forget that the thing that makes the World Cup possible is that everybody accepts the rules of the game. Nobody cares where your teammates were born. It's about merit. It's about cooperation. It's about the larger community. The community makes the event possible and that's more important than who wins or whether the people out there making the calls make a mistake now and then. But you have to understand that is a microcosm of the great debate going on in the world today.

One of the places I did not make peace and I didn't get to in time was Rwanda, where 700,000 people were hacked to death with machetes in 100 days in the mid-1990's. So later, I went to Africa with my wife and I asked The then-leader of the Rwandan government invited me to come because we tried to help them put things back together and I asked if I could meet with some victims of the Genocide in Rwanda who were still working for a better country.

So I was sitting there and there were these 6 people sitting around a little semi-circle talking to Hillary and me. They were all very moving. I mean, they were really impressive people. They had terrible things happen to them. I remember this one really great looking young guy, had had his arm chopped off above the elbow and he laughed and he referred to himself as a “one-armed man for peace.” He said, “You know, they cut my arm off. I'm doing more good now than I ever did when I had two arms.” And I was marveling, you know? This beautiful young man. He could be home feeling sorry for himself because he has one arm.

The only person I didn't understand why she was there was the last person to speak. There was this beautiful African woman in this brightly colored dress of the late country in Africa with no visible marks on her. Then she began to talk. She explained that she lived in a village where she and her husband and family were in a minority but they lived there for years and they had wonderful relationships with their neighbors. Their children played together. They celebrated holidays together. Everything was wonderful.

Then one day the people came with the machetes. They were looking for people in her tribe and her next door neighbor, her friend of 10 years, sold her out. She said she had no marks on her body because they hacked her all over the back and the neck and they thought they had broken her neck and cut the relevant veins and she would surely bleed to death, but she didn't. She described how she awoke in a pool of her own blood to look at her husband and her 6 children lying dead around her. She said she asked God to tell her why she had been spared. Then she asked God to kill her too. Then she said, “I realized that I had been spared for something and it could not be something as mean as vengeance and so I live my life trying to put my country back together.”

Now if that lady can do that, what are the Indians and Pakistanis fighting about? Why can't the Israelis and Palestinians figure it out? Why can't we, in countries that are much more blessed, come up with the modest amounts of money necessary to resolve these thorny educational and economic and healthcare disparities of the world? The answer is, we can. But we have to get it. We have to understand that if we don't want more September the 11ths, we have to be really tough with our security, but we have to be really wise in building a world with more partners and fewer terrorists and we have to believe that we can do this.

Young people come to me all the time and ask for advice about being President. They want to be President. They want to be in politics and they ask me for advice. I said, “Let me tell you one thing. There's a big difference in wanting to do something and believing you can. A lot of people want things but they don't believe they can. We have to believe we can do this. We have built this world without walls. It is a joy for most of us. But it is full of difficulty and danger. The simple task of the next 20 years or so is to make it a home for all the world's children. If we do, it'll be the most exciting time, the most prosperous time, the most peaceful time in human history. Thank you very much. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
