{title} Remarks at Success Resources, Singapore {/title}
{event} Success Resources, Singapore  {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} May 24, 2002 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much for that wonderful welcome. I'd like to thank Ambassador Lavin for his kind and generous introduction. I'd like to thank the people from Success Resources for inviting me to Singapore, Richard and Veronica Tonn, Patrick Lude(?). I'd also like to thank your former Ambassador, Steve Green for coming here to be with me today. We're long time friends and I thank him for his service in this great country.

I am particularly grateful to be here today because your invitation gave me a reason to make my first trip to Singapore. {APPLAUSE} Lest you believe that I didn't come here when I was President because I did not have sufficient respect for Singapore, let me tell you, that's not true. I went to 72 countries when I was President, but there were never enough problems here. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} This country is the living embodiment of success, and I normally had to show up some place where people had a problem they needed my help on. So it is perfectly fitting that you meet here.

Singapore is the embodiment of all the economic and political transformation of Asia. Over 3,000 multinational corporations here. One of the smallest 20 countries in the world, but America's 10th largest trading partner. {APPLAUSE} I was especially honored to work with Prime Minster Goh on a whole range of things, from expanding trade to combating terror, and always honored to think about the success of this country with its 3 major and very diverse economic groups, different religious traditions and 4 official languages. A lot of the rest of the world has something to learn from Singapore.

Singapore and America and Prime Minster Go and I were among the founders of the Annual Leaders Meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Group in 1993. We voted for a free trade area in the Asia-Pacific region early in this new century. We started negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement between our two nations and I am very pleased that President Bush's administration has pledged to finish the work we started, making the first bilateral Trade Agreement ever reached between the United States and an Asian nation.

By any measure, the partnership between the United States and Singapore was and is a success, part of a shared vision of Asia in the 21st Century, a region in the forefront of increasing prosperity, security, peace and freedom. Our strategy to advance that vision had a lot of other elements as well: Security cooperation with Asion; minimizing the financial crisis in the late 1990's in Asia; a Trade Agreement and normalization of relations between the United States and Vietnam, something that meant a great deal to me personally; improved relations with India for the first time in 40 years; working with the great President of South Korea and Nobel Peace Price Winner, Kim Dae jung to end North Korea's dangerous missile program, as we had previously ended its nuclear program; peace and independence of East Timor.

I was honored to represent President Bush and the American People at Independent Day for East Timor just a few days ago. We worked to reduce the toll of landmines in Cambodia. We worked on a whole range of issues with our old Ali, Japan, and perhaps most important, together we brought China into the World Trade Organization, began to advance the rule of law there and cooperated in the United Nations on a whole range of issues.

Now what has all that got to do with what you're here for? {LAUGHTER} I believe that we were successful in building an Asia-Pacific region that advanced freedom and prosperity and security, and reduced the allure of terrorism and other destructive forces. How did we do it? We had a vision of where we wanted to go. We had a clear notion of where we were and what the distance was between where we were and where we wanted to go. We had a strategy from getting from here to there and we believed that we could do it. It's a great thing having a vision, a strategy, based on a clear view of where you are. You never have to wonder what you're going to do when you get up in the morning. It just flows naturally from the vision that drives you, the strategy you developed to implement the vision and the evidence you see everyday that you haven't gotten there yet. But it's also important to believe you can do it.

When young people come up to me in America all the time and they say, “I want to be in politics. I'd like to run for President some day. I'd like to do this, that and the other thing. Give me some advice.” And I always say, “First of all, there's a big difference between wanting to do something and believing you can.” I'm a great basketball fan. Once on a miraculous Spring night, when I was 16 years old, in my church basketball league, I actually dunked a basketball game, ball, in a game in which I scored 16 points. The only time in which I ever won a game for my team and the only time in my life I'd ever dunked a basketball. I want to dunk a basketball again, but I don't believe I can. There's a big difference in wanting to do something and believing you can.”

Now, whatever you do, whatever you're doing now and whatever you do for the rest of your life, will take place within the larger global context of the early 21st Century. So I want to talk to you about that. What is it? What would you like it to be? What are we all supposed to do to get from where we are, to where we'd like to go?

Let me ask you a question, in a way that you may have not considered. What does the success of Singapore as an open-trading, multi-religious, multi-ethnic, successful country and the horror of what happened in America on September the 11th? What do those two apparently, totally unrelated things tell us about the world in which we live?

Most people, if you ask them, say, “Give me a word that describes the modern world.” Most people who say that word is “globalization.” I much prefer the word “interdependence” because it implies more than economics, economics plus. We clearly live in the most interdependent age in human history. I spent the night in a hotel here last night. I could watch CNN. I could watch BBC. I could watch Korean movies, Japanese movies, Chinese movies, American movies.

We live in a world where we have torn down barriers, exemplified by the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. We have collapsed distances, exemplified by how rapidly we move around and by the growth of the Internet. When I became President, there were only 50 sites on the World Wide Web. When I left office, there were 50 million, only 8 years later, and the number is much larger than that today. And we have spread information and technology wider than ever before. The World Bank and the Discovery Channel are now putting solar power generators on carts driven by animals to take into the bush in Africa and the rain forest in Latin America, so that technology could be accessed in the most remote parts of the world, to educate children who otherwise would never go to school.

Now in a world where you have torn down barriers, collapsed distances and spread information and technology, you can expect a lot of good things to happen and Singapore has made the most of those good things. But if there are people with different values then you have and different objectives, who see life as a “zero sum game” (in order for them to achieve their objective, someone else has to lose). In an interdependent world, they can use those very same attributes for negative purposes. So on September the 11th, members of the al-Qaeda network used the open borders of the United East, the ease of travel, the access to technology (an airplane), and information (how to fly the plane), to kill 3,100 people. People who were not part of their community; people they did not believe had a right to live because their view was different.

That is the central thing I have to say to you about the world in which you live. You live in a world that is highly interdependent. It's been really good for more than half the people of the world in a lot of ways. But it is not an integrated world and the central question of the next few decades will be whether those of us who are benefiting from this new world can move it from interdependence to an integrated global community. In other words, can the globe work more like Singapore, across all the differences.

In order to do that, we have to have a strategy. If we want a 21st Century world that makes maximum use of these fabulous developments and technology and economics and the biological sciences and minimizes the destructive forces, we have to frankly say, “We're nowhere near there now.” So we have to ask ourselves, “How do we get from where we are to where we want to go? What is our strategy?” Then you have to ask yourself (unless you're in the government somewhere), you say, “Well, I can't do anything about most of these things, except vote for somebody who's for it. What am I supposed to do?” But there is something for everybody to do, even if it's nothing but sticking up for the fundamental ideas that have to guide us into the future.

Basically, I think we have to do three things. First, we have to work together to prevent the forces of destruction from defeating us. That's what we're trying to do in Afghanistan. That's what we're trying to do in ending North Korea's missile program. That's what we're trying to do in limiting the production and distribution of biological, chemical and small-scale nuclear weapons. That's what we're trying to do in America, when we help other countries from Africa to the Philippines, to Indonesia, to our neighbors in Columbia to defend themselves against terrorism. So we have to work on what I would call a “prevent and punish” strategy so that people who share these values can protect themselves better. But that will never, ever be enough, not in an interdependent world, not if you have open borders, easy travel and wide access to information and technology. So if you can't have a strategy that just says, “We're going to keep all these bad things from happening so nobody will bother you here while you go about pursuing success,” what else is there to do?

The second thing we have to do is build a world where we have more partners and fewer terrorists. I grew up in a world that was built by people that thought that way. At the end of World War II, the major players in the United States (President Truman, Secretary of State Marshall, General MacArthur) said to the American people and our friends in Europe, “We ought to spend some money to make more partners to avoid World War III. We ought to organize free nations until we can win the cold war.” Think about what's happened.

What did we do? We established the United Nations, the international financial institutions, the world trading system. In Europe, we had NATO. We had Alliances for Freedom, similar ones in Asia. We had wars in the last 50 years, but there was no World War III. In the 1970's, China made a decision toward engagement rather than with the rest of the world and in 1989, the Berlin Wall fell and all of Europe gave itself up to the democratic government and free markets. So the major adversaries in World War II now cooperate, and the major adversaries in the cold war now cooperate and all of us can come to this fabulous building today and think about how we're going to make more money or whatever else you're thinking about because at the end of World War II, people who were in positions of responsibility made a decision to build a world that had more friends and fewer wars.

So now it's more complicated, because the great conflicts of the future will probably not be between nation States but within people within nations, or terrorists operating across national borders. So how do we build a world with more partners and fewer terrorists?

First, we have to recognize that not everybody lives like we do, and that even though Singapore has found the modern world virtually an unmixed blessing, the world is full of paradoxes. Let me just give you a few of them, because you have to deal with the contradictory reality. Keep in mind there are about 6 billion people on earth today.

Consider this: the global economy that has served Singapore so well and America has lifted more people out of poverty in the last 20 years than at any time in history. Therefore all the protestors at these globalization meetings are wrong, when they say “globalization caused poverty.” In the last 20 years, poor nations that chose openness through trade and investment grew at 5% a year. Poor nations that were closed grew at 1% a year. That's the good news. What's the paradox? Half the world's people still live on less than $2.00 a day. A billion people still live on less than $1.00 a day. A billion people go to bed hungry overnight.

Consider the social paradox. There are more benefits to education than ever before. Even in poor countries, just one year of schooling adds 10% a year to income. So the benefits are uniform and felt everywhere but 130 million children are not in school at all (half the children in Sub-Sahara and Africa, half the children on the Indian subcontinent, a quarter of the children in the poorest nations of East Asia).

Look at healthcare. Infant mortality is down; infant mortality is up, even in the developing world. The sequencing of the Human Genome and the development of submicroscopic diagnostic techniques for identifying tumors through nano-technology, mean that within a decade, young mothers will be coming home from the hospital with babies and “gene cards,” which will plot the future of your child and also tell you how to minimize the problems. We've already identified the two major genetic differences that lead to breast cancer. We're close on Alzheimer's, close on Parkinson's. When this happens, sometime in the next 10 years, those of you still in your childbearing years will bring home children with life expectancies of 90 years. There's never been anything like it. It's wonderful.

On the other hand, what's the paradox? 10 million children die every single year in the world of largely preventable childhood infectious diseases. Of all the people who perish this year, 1 in 4 will die of AIDS, TB, Malaria and infections related to diarrhea, most of them little children who never got a single clean glass of water in their entire lives.

In these places, terrorists find fertile ground. They build on resentment, humiliation, shame, and make no mistake about it, they threaten the success you hope to pursue. Because everything that brings you into this auditorium today depends upon more and more places working the way Singapore does.

Consider the environment. The richer a country gets, the cleaner the environment gets. You can see that in every major country in Asia. I've been coming to this part of the world for almost 25 years now and I have seen it happen over and over again. What's the paradox? The overall impact of economic development on the world has been negative. Why? Because in the industrial economy, most people believe to get rich, stay rich or get richer, you have to burn more coal or oil and put more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, that drives up the temperature of the climate, that causes global warming. If we warm for the next 50 years at the rate of the last 10, whole island nations in the Pacific will flood. We, in America, will lose the Florida Everglades and 50 feet of Manhattan Island, where I have my office now. I'm going to have to take a boat to work. {LAUGHTER} But most importantly, the ability to grow food will vanish in major parts of the world and millions of people will be turned into food refugees adding to the instability of the world at the very time when we want it to be more stable.

So what's the answer? We have to take some of our wealth to resolve these paradoxes in a way that brings more people into the world that we almost take for granted. If we do the right things, in 20 years, they'll be having conferences like this in African capitals, that wouldn't know how to have a meeting like this today. You talk to somebody about success, they'd say, “Success? Give me a job. Success is feeding my family tomorrow. Success is not having my child die of Malaria.” But it's important.

The third thing I want to say and maybe the most important of all, is that we are driven by values and ideas. Yes, money is important, but the systems within which we make money are rooted in values and ideas. The great French writer, Victor Hugo, said “That there is nothing more powerful than an idea whose time has come.” He might have said, “For this time, there is nothing more destructive than an idea whose time has come and gone but it hangs on.”
You are living in a world where we have to create a global community based on simple rules. Everybody counts. Everybody's got a role to play. We all do better when we work together. That is based on a core value. Our differences are important but our common humanity matters more.

Now, we're here in Singapore, a country with 3 big ethnic groups, 4 languages, where people work together and against all the odds, this little place with no natural resources, sits astride the world economy like a colossus. Why? Because everybody counts, everybody's got a role to play and people work together. Economic and social policies flow from those basic ideas. You can go to a mosque or a temple or a Christian church this afternoon, because we value differences and community preferences and convictions matter, but you can to go all of them because common humanity matters more.

Now, that may seem self-evident to you, but the truth is for most of human history, people have behaved more like the terrorists of September the 11th or the combatants in the Middle East, than the people going to work in the businesses of Singapore or the people who rose to the challenge of peace in Northern Ireland, and put aside 600 years of fighting there.

I just ask you to bear with me because whatever you do, trust me, this is the issue of the new century. Depending on how you read the archeological evidence, people like us, identifiable human beings, have been walking around on earth in some condition or another for somewhere between 50 and 100,000 years. Civilization, as we know it, has existed only for about 6,000 years. During almost all that time, the time when we became civilized, that we came out of the caves and we began to gather in cities and we began to gather in cities and we began to cooperate as humans with one another. Almost that entire time, cooperation always had 2 elements. We'll cooperate with our family, with our clan, with our tribe, with our city, with our nation, because we get more done inside when we cooperate and besides, we have to defend ourselves against those people over there, the other people, our enemies, our adversaries.

Throughout all of human history with the economic progress we made, and in spite of all the religious teachings we've had (and I'll say more about that in a minute) we were never able to escape organizing ourselves and thinking about hating the other. First, you don't trust them. Then you don't like them. Then you hate them. Then you dehumanize them. Then it's okay to kill them. This has been the way of the world from the beginning.

In the first part of the 20th Century, we almost destroyed each other. World War I, World War II, the Holocaust, the massive slaughters in the Soviet Union. We nearly destroyed ourselves. It's a miracle nobody ever dropped another automatic weapon. Then we had the U.N., the idea that there could be a global community. Keep in mind, in 6,000 years of human history, this happened 57 years ago, but because of the cold war, it wasn't possible. Then China decides to integrate with the rest of the world, then the Berlin Wall falls, 1989. So in 6,000 years of history, for the first time, 13 years ago, we finally had the chance to live together in peace. Is it surprising to you that we didn't just up and do it?

You should not be discouraged. Keep in mind what I said. It's a big difference between wanting to do something and believing you can do it. You read all these terrible headlines today. There's a million troops facing each other in Cashmere, continued turmoil in the Middle East, new warnings of terrorist incidents, Indonesia worried about terrorists now. You read about these things. It's enough to believe there's nothing you can do about it. You shouldn't feel that way. We've only had the chance to create a global Singapore for 13 years and all this time we've been learning how to do this and fighting against all these human instincts that are almost built into us.

Now, this is hard to do. I believe Mohandas Ghandi was the greatest person to walk the earth in my lifetime. The Indians here will remember that he was murdered in India, not by a Muslim but by a fellow Hindu. Why? Because he wanted India for everybody, for the Muslims and the Jains and the Sikhs and the Jews and the Christians. In the Middle East, which political leaders have been murdered? Sadat, and my friend Rabin. Who killed Sadat? Not the Israeli Commandos, an angry Egyptian who thought that he was a bad Egyptian because he wanted a secular government for Egypt and peace with the Israelis. And on the darkest day of my presidency, I think, my friend, Yitzhak Rabin (whom I loved as much as I ever loved another man) was killed by an angry young Israeli who thought he was a bad Jew and a bad Israeli because he wanted to give up a lifetime of fighting and give the Palestinians their state in the Westbank in Gaza and give the Palestinian kids some hope because he realized that Israel no longer needed land for security since you could have terrorists blowing you up from within and missiles attacking you from without, that you had to have harmony for security.

In my last year in college in America, Martin Luther King, the greatest American in my lifetime, and Robert Kennedy were both murdered trying to reconcile the American people to each other. This is hard. And it violates All these behaviors violate thousands of years of scriptural teaching. The Tora says, “He who turns away from a stranger, might as well turn away from the most high God.” The Koran says, “Allah put the different peoples on the earth, not that they despise one another, but that they might know one another and learn from one another.” The Christian New Testament says, “That the greatest commandment is to love God with all your heart” and the second is (and I quote) “Like unto it, to love your neighbor as yourself.” In the Dhammapada, the Buddhist says, “Never by hatred does hatred cease. Hatred ceases by love alone.” This is an eternal law.

So people a lot smarter than I have, been saying this for a long time. None of us behave that way. You know, we're still that way. All of us, our faiths, we read these things and we can't live by them. Only since 1989, have we had a chance to say, “We will keep our faiths. We will be proud of our ethnical and racial traditions. We will be proud of the nations we're from, but the only way we can cherish our differences is if we live together in a global community. We have to move from interdependence to integration.

It's never been done before. If you really want to have a successful life, you have to support that movement. For the great contest of the 21st Century is between the forces of integration and the forces of disintegration, the forces of community and the forces of chaos. We can do this. We can do this. It won't be easy, but it will be ultimately the measure of humanity's success. Thank you very much. 

{/speech}
