{title} Summation and Closing Address of the Clinton Global Initiative {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} September 22, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you, David. I just want to make two brief points about this area, because I didn't get to attend some of the sessions. The first is about the economy. One of the great challenges for wealthy countries is to continue to discharge our responsibility to the global economy by keeping our markets open to products produced in poorer countries. We cannot do that if our own people lose confidence in the ability of the American market to function for them. If you look at America, our fundamental problem is we still have a relatively low unemployment rate, but flat wages. This is the first time we've ever had five years of productivity growth, a 40-year-high in corporate profits, and stagnant wages. The reason is we haven't found a serious source of new, good-paying jobs. The obvious answer is a commitment to a clean, independent energy future.

If you look at Europe, the big problem is that the cost of preserving the social safety net has led to higher unemployment levels than is desirable. The obvious answer is a commitment to clean, new jobs. If you look at the performance of the UK, the European economy most like ours, they have a comparable unemployment rate, but they haven't had wage stagnation. I am convinced it's because they made a commitment to beat their Kyoto targets and created a whole range of new jobs.

If you look at the developing world and you want to raise per capita income, you will have to spend a fortune and wait for a long time for the most remote villages to get centralized power grids. But if we went to decentralized power the way we went to decentralized cell phones, so you don't have to wait for the power lines to run out, and you had a commitment to solar energy, to wind energy, and to energy efficiency in the developing world, it could contribute to economic growth.

The second thing I wanted to say, for those of you who haven't made commitments yet, many of you are involved locally in the welfare of your institutions of higher education. Our chief sponsor, Tom Golisano, has done an enormous amount of work in Rochester at the Institute of Technology there. A lot of you do this. The colleges and universities in the United States and throughout the world have enormous potential to lead the way toward a clean energy future. In Minnesota earlier this year, two colleges, St. Olaf's and Carleton, had a contest to see who could have the biggest reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. It was fascinating to read. It read like a football saga. “We got our windmill up first.” “Yeah, but we fixed our buildings first.”

Former President Bush and I just funded two green schools in New Orleans as a part of the Katrina rebuilding effort. All these school kids are going to learn, as they go to school, about how to do this. It will affect everything they do for the rest of their lives. So, one of the things we need to do, which I hoped to get done by CGI but haven't finished, is to get the colleges and universities in America committed in an organized way to greenhouse gas reductions, in a way that reduces the cost of operations, and if you're still a parent of a college-age child, may help to ameliorate the tuition burden in the {COMMENT="Inaudible"} years. So, I ask those of you who haven't made a commitment yet, if you're looking for a place where you get a quick turnaround and high return, that's it. Thank you very much, David. {APPLAUSE} Now I'd like to ask our—

{OTHER-SPEAK} Mr. President— {/OTHER-SPEAK} 

You're not done? I'm sorry. I thought you were.

{OTHER-SPEAK} We have three more commitments on climate change for you, Mr. President. {/OTHER-SPEAK} 

Oh, okay. Oh, this is good. {LAUGHTER} Wal-Mart is making a commitment to the packaging of every product sold at Wal-Mart stores through a supplier packaging scorecard and reward system. The commitment is a million dollars in the first year that will achieve a minimum of $100 million in cost savings. Right-sizing the packaging of just one Wal-Mart store-owned line of toys, Kid Connection, just by doing that -- listen to this, this is unbelievable -- Wal-Mart saved 1,358 barrels of oil, 5,190 trees and $3.5 million in transportation costs in one year. Now the company will measure how much packaging its 60,000 suppliers use in transport, and will reward its suppliers according to how much they can reduce their environmental impact. The company expects that by 2013, the commitment will keep 213,000 trucks off the road in the United States every single year, for a total cumulative savings of 66.7 million gallons of diesel fuel, saving the supply chain $3.8 billion by 2013. I rest my case. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} Thank you very much. Is Lee here? Come on up. It's still in my hand. This is great. {APPLAUSE}

Now, I'd like to ask Rick Fedrizzi, the President, CEO, and Founding Chairman of the U.S. Green Building Council and LaDonna Monsees, the CEO of Newland Communities, to come up here. They have made a commitment to help Americans make their homes more energy efficient through an informative online consumer resource center that will give its users practical, easy to use, credible information on the benefits of green homes, explaining how saving energy saves money, cuts greenhouse gas emissions, and makes for healthier living. The resource center will be the cornerstone of a comprehensive year-long campaign by the Green Building Council and Newland Communities to educate consumers about the benefits of environmentally friendly, energy efficient homes. Generally, green homes are 30 to 50 percent more energy efficient than traditional ones. And reports say that the green home marketplace may be at a tipping point. By mid-year 2007, 64 percent of all homebuilders surveyed reported that they anticipated that they would be moderately or heavily involved in green building practices. The EPA ranks indoor air pollution among the top five environmental risks in the United States. Unhealthy air is found in up to 30 percent of new and renovated buildings, but not in green buildings. So I thank you for that. I'm proud that our Presidential Library has received a certificate for leadership in energy and environmental design and has cut its energy costs by 34 percent. As I get a little ahead, I'm going to do better than that. Thank you very much. Let's give them a big hand. This is great. {APPLAUSE} Thank you. See you soon. Thank you. {APPLAUSE}

As the owners of a home that's over 100 years old, I can testify to how important this is. You know, during the week, when I'm home alone and my Senator is down there voting in Washington, I actually decided that I would personally see how hard it would be to replace all my light bulbs with compact fluorescent ones. It's not as easy as you think. {LAUGHTER} I even called Jeffrey Immelt and said I was trying to buy GE bulbs made in America, but I needed more shapes and sizes. {LAUGHTER} And he said to me, “Well, get my market up and I'll make different bulbs.” So it's a chicken-and-egg deal. But this is really important what they have done. You'd be amazed how many people want to do something, but they have a limited amount of time, and they shouldn't have to go looking around, schlepping all over the universe trying to figure out how they can get the job done. So this is really important. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE}

And I have now, on at least two occasions during CGI, perhaps embarrassed -- but I meant to compliment -- both Barbra Streisand and Rupert Murdoch for finally finding something they agreed on. But I would like to ask Barbra Streisand to come up here and be recognized. She gave me the first million dollars for the Clinton Foundation to represent and help facilitate the movement of the Large Cities Group in drastically reducing their greenhouse gas emissions. We have now enrolled 32 of the 40 biggest cities in the world in a common commitment to drastically reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. I refuse to take any money, any public money from any of them. So I had to raise the money from contributors. Barbra gave me my first million dollars, and then Rupert Murdoch gave me a half a million dollars, and that will get us through the first year. So let's give her a big hand and ask her to come up. {APPLAUSE}

I told him we were going to get more out of him. She says Rupert's richer than she is and should give more. {LAUGHTER} I knew we could get a little politics here if we waited long enough. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} You may have to reissue Evergreen now, with a new meaning. {LAUGHTER}

Now, I'm going to try again. I think we're going to our Health group, with Chris Jennings. Is that right? Is that next? This man has got more scars on him than I do, because he was my principle health advisor when I was President. He's now head of Jennings Policy Studies, a health care consulting firm, and a knowledgeable and terrific public servant. Thank you, Chris, it's your turn. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
