{title} Remarks to the Star Forum at Cherry Hill High School East {/title}
{event} Cherry Hill, New Jersey {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} November 10, 2004 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Thank you very much. Well I'd like to begin by thanking Marcia Pecker and, for inviting me here. I'd like to thank Michael Carbone for that remarkable introduction. I told all the young people out there with me that, you know, I'd forgotten half those things myself. {COMMENT="He laughs"} I thank your School Superintendent, Dr. Sherman; and Mayor Platt, thank you. It's great to be back in this community again, where I was on the weekend before my election as President in 1992. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} And I remember it very clearly. I also want to compliment the choir. I sneaked behind the curtain and shook hands with them all after they sang. I thought they were wonderful, and I thank them. {APPLAUSE}

Tonight, it's my understanding that after I finish speaking, we're going to have some time for questions, so I will try to compress what I have to say without oversimplifying it, so we have more time for your questions. I think community meetings like this are very, very important. They give us a chance to have conversations that go beyond the kind of things you see in political campaigns: the 30 second ads, or people trying to score debating points, and I think that's important.

I want to say just a few words about the election, only to put it in the context of where we are as a country and where the world is going. If you want to ask me more questions about it, we can do that later. The first thing I want to say is regardless of your party affiliation, our country can be proud of the fact that there was a dramatic increase in voter turnout for the election, that we had something like 10 million new voters and a lot of them were young.

I supported Senator Kerry because I agree with his policies and the direction in which he wanted to take the country, but as a political leader, I could appreciate the brilliant campaign that I believe was run by the President and his supporters. It's too early to draw definitive conclusions, but it appears that the election came out about 51 1/2 to 48 1/2 one way instead of the other way because about 4% of the voters changed their mind Or didn't change their mind, but made up their minds in the last 24 hours and they decided mostly to vote for the President because they felt that it was not wise to change leaders while we're fighting terror and dealing with the problems in Iraq. How we got to there, however, dealt with a whole lot of other things, which you've all doubtless seen and talked about, including the rise of evangelical voters voting on what they call the moral issues in staggering numbers in small towns in rural America all across the country.

Now what I want to say to you is two things tonight. Like I said, if you want to talk about the election, you can ask questions about that later. But I want to say two things that I want you to think about.

In spite of all the television ads, all the campaign appearances and all the debates, the election probably raised as many questions as it answered on important issues that will actually affect your lives, and that actually affect the decision-making that a President does, and I'll just mentioned a few.

I don't really think the election results told us where we should go with regard to our budget. It really bothered me that we have quadrupled the debt of America in the 12 years before I became President. I thought it was a tax on the middle class and a deterrent to the poor moving into the middle class. It meant we spent more and more money every year, your tax money, paying interest on the debt and I was determined to do something about it. So we cut the deficit dramatically with a Bill in 1993. Then we had the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. We had three surpluses before I left office, paid down almost $600 billion dollars of the national debt. We were on track to have, instead of the debt, a $5 trillion dollar surplus over the coming decade, which I hoped would allow us to deal with the retirement of the baby-boomers and the stresses on Social Security and Medicare.

The recession that came briefly to our country and the economic sluggishness of the last four years was partly the cause of the collapse in the computer stocks and the telecommunication stocks, partly the shock aftermath of 9/11, and we're crawling our way out of it. But we passed not one, but two, big tax cuts, for the first time in history, while we were carrying on major military operations, and half the money went to people in the top 1%. Most of us did not ask for it and frankly resented being the only group of people in America not being asked to contribute to our country's war against terror or the rebuilding of the American economy or securing a better future for our children. It has left us with a huge deficit hole. How is this deficit being financed?

It's $400 billion dollars this year. It's actually $150 billion dollars more than that. Because the first thing we do is take all the Social Security surplus that you pay in Social Security taxes over and above what's necessary to pay current retirees, and we buy government bonds to cover part of our deficit. So if they tell you we have a $400 billion dollar deficit, it's actually about $550 billion, because Social Security sopped up $150 billion of it.

Now we went out-- How did we pay for the rest of it? We borrowed the money. And an inordinate percentage of it comes from almost daily borrowings from the governments of China and Japan. Think of it. A lot of Americans are worried about the outsourcing of our jobs to China and elsewhere. So here's a country with a per capita income of about $1,300 a year loaning us money every day to cover my tax cut. {COMMENT="Rustle in audience"} Did the American people really ratify that economic policy in the last election? Did they even understand it? If not, why not? And what are we going to do about it?

We also have about a $500 billion dollar a year trade deficit. We have to cover that. So we have to get all this money into our country every year just to cover our deficit spending before we get any money to invest in the future. Sooner or later, people get tired of loaning us money at low interest rates, just to keep the value of our dollar up, so we'll have enough money to buy their products. That's why they loan us money. They loan us money at low interest rates. The dollar stays strong and you can afford to go to the mall and buy products made in China, Japan and elsewhere. But you don't have to be a genius to figure out that sooner or later, this system could quickly come to an end. People get tired of loaning us money at interest, which we then turn around and use to buy their products. Because we, the wealthiest country on earth, didn't have enough self-discipline to avoid throwing tax cuts at people like me, who didn't need it. At the same time, we had to spend more money on fighting terror, the operations in Iraq, Homeland Security and a whole lot of other things. Now that's my opinion. You don't have to agree with me but somebody needs an answer to that. We didn't resolve that in the election.

We didn't resolve how we're going to provide affordable healthcare for people who don't have it. How we're going to deal with the crying need for more affordable medicine for seniors and others, which the current law does not do. I think the most important domestic issue, that was almost completely undiscussed, is we didn't decide how we're going to make America less dependent on foreign oil and more committed to a clean energy future, which will help us economically, environmentally, politically and in terms of our national security. And yet there was almost no discussion of it. We're With the economy down for four years, we were still importing more foreign oil than we were on the day I left office. And there is a $1 trillion Let me use that number again, $1 trillion dollar untapped market right now for clean energy technology, that could be used to create an unlimited number of high-paying jobs in America.

I'll just give you an example from my own experience. Next week, I will have the honor of going home to Arkansas with President Bush, former President Bush, former President Carter and a large number of people from around the world to do what we do when we retire, Presidents, after a while. I'm going to dedicate my Presidential Library. And it's a very It's a large structure that I designed basically to be the first major museum to chronicle America's transition into the 21st Century. How we moved into an interdependent world, away from the Cold War; how it changed the way we worked, the way we lived, the way we relate to each other and people beyond our borders. And all of you will be able to visit it in three-dimensional technology on the Internet if you can't come down and see it. It's going to be really, really interesting.

What I'm proud of is that I believe the building designs will win an international environmental award, because there are two buildings. There's a big, open museum building that's full of light. And then there's a building behind it that stores the millions and millions of documents, the 2 million pictures, all the artifacts that I accumulated in 8 years. That building is covered, on the roof, with solar reflectors, made in America. Good jobs for Americans. {APPLAUSE} That building is Then the museum building, because I wanted it to be light and airy all the time, is glass and steel. But in order to display any of my records, under the law, I have to keep the ultraviolet light off of it. So we got special grainy glass, that looks a little grainy from the outside, but when you're in, it looks clear looking out. Then in the floors, which are very hard bamboo, we have underneath, piping running, tubes running, miles and miles and miles of them, that carry hot water in the winter and cold water in the summer to have natural cooling and heating. The combined impact of all of this will to be cut the traditional energy usage of that building, which is mammoth, by 30% a year, in a way that created jobs for Americans, put less stress on the environment, required less foreign oil and therefore made us more secure, more environmentally responsible and economically better off. And that's one tiny example. There was almost no discussion of this, in the election. But it will have a huge impact on your future, particularly the young people in this audience.

I'll give you another example, the future of Social Security. And I won't talk in great deal about this unless you want to. But when I left office, I had a plan, which I asked the Congress to adopt, and they declined, because they wanted a crisis in Social Security so they could privatize it. But I wanted them to take the surplus that I had planned to build up over the next decade. And every time you run a surplus, you reduce the debt, therefore you pay less money, less tax money on interest on the debt this year then you did last year, and then less money next year, and less money the year after that, because your interest payments go down. So I wanted to take the interest savings and put it all into Social Security. And it's totally justified because we've been using Social Security to cover our deficit for 20 years before that. That would have made Social Security good till the year 2053, I think. That's beyond the life of all but the most fortunate baby-boomers. I'm the oldest of the baby-boomers. I hate it, but I am. {LAUGHTER} And if I live that long, I'll be 107. It seems unlikely, given the life I've had. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

You know, after I've just went through this heart surgery, I'm just glad to be standing here tonight. {APPLAUSE} But look, let's be serious. That's with no changes. Now I know there's a lot of support in the Republican caucus in Congress for prioritizing part of Social Security. I looked at this very seriously. The argument is the Social Security investment you make doesn't earn a very high rate of return. It's somewhat misleading because one-third of the Social Security expenditures go to cover Disability payments that we make to young people and their families, for people who have unfortunate disabilities before they reach retirement age. But still, the funds aren't-- They're government guaranteed bonds, so they don't pay high interest rates. Because it's 100% certain return. And the more certain the return, the lower the interest rate. The more risk, the higher the interest rate you have to pay.

Now over any 30 year period, the stock market has had a greater return than government bonds, and that's the argument that the President and his party will make to partially prioritize Social Security for the younger people in the audience. You take, let's say 2% of your payroll tax. Instead of paying 7 1/2%, you keep 2% and invest it as you see fit. Or if we adopt a more conservative course, we might say (something I entertain), invest it the way Federal employees can invest their retirement funds. That is, here are three mutual funds and government bonds, if you wanted 100% certainty, if you want to stay where you were.

Now it all sounds so good. The problem is that for many, many years, we've been paying current retirees out of current receipts. So if all of you under 40, let's say, took 2% of your payroll and started putting it into a stock fund, either a safer one, like one of the Federal Retirement Funds or investing it however you wished, it would immediately blow a hole of somewhere between a trillion and a trillion and a half dollars, into the obligation we have to pay current retirees. That was never really talked about, or explained.
When I asked my Republic friends how they were going to cover it, they say, “We're going to borrow it.” So I said, “We're going to borrow another trillion and a half on top of this money you're already borrowing to cover my tax cut and worry about it tomorrow.” No country is big and strong enough to avoid paying the consequences of fiscal irresponsibility. But if you've been in trouble here lately, you get about a nanosecond before the global markets bust you. That's why Brazil and Mexico have to be careful.

If people trade in your currency, like dollars, and you've got a big old healthy complicated economy, it may be four years, it may be six, it may be eight, but sooner or later, the hammer comes down. No one can escape the discipline of the fiscal markets, and sooner or later, 2 plus 2 has to equal four, even for governments. So that's the problem.

There's another problem you need to consider, which is that If all of you, all the young people I see out here, if you took the 2% out and you invested it and you earned a high rate of return, we would still have to have an enormous amount of money, now coming from the Social Security Fund, to cover our debt. Right? Somebody's got to buy our debt, so because we don't have an automatic claim on Social Security every month, we'll have to raise interest rates to get other sources of funds to cover the debt. When we do, some of that money might come out of the stock market and your stock returns will go down and our payments, interest payments, will go up leaving less money for education, health and other things.

There's no magic solution, that's the point I want to make to you. Anybody that'll tell you “this is easy,” is crazy. The easiest thing to do would have been to keep running the surplus and save the money and fix Social Security and Medicare the way we did. We added 27 years to the life of Medicare and we added another 20 years to the life of Social Secure and we could have just kept doing that, as long as we had savings.

Now we're back to deficit spending to cover the tax cuts of people like me. We precipitated an illusory or an unnecessary financial crisis, which will now require us to do something more significant for Social Security and Medicare. The point I want to make is, there doesn't need to be a Republican or a Democratic solution here. This is about arithmetic and options and none of them are simple and none of them are free of consequences. So I just want my country to deal with them.

Let me just give you two more things, very briefly. There was a lot of discussion, in general, about Homeland Security in the campaign. But we don't know what that means. We know it's a good thing and we want it, but what does it mean? {COMMENT="Stirring in audience"} Think about what Homeland Security meant to you before 9/11. What did domestic security mean to you before 9/11? Right? Did it mean that there would never be another robbery in Cherry Hill? {LAUGHTER} Did it mean that there would never be another drunk driver being irresponsible? Did it mean there would never be another shooting on the streets of any New Jersey city? No. Of course, it didn't. I wasn't trying to be funny or cute.

You felt secure if you thought there was a reasonable chance that we could stop big bad things from happening. That is there might be one robbery in Cherry Hill but not everybody's house would be burglarized. There might be one drunk driver but we'd have enough discipline to control having a whole spade of terrible accidents. There might be one shooting but we didn't think a gang could take over Trenton, or Newark or any other city in New Jersey. In other words, security in a crime sense is keeping big bad things from happening. And that's what it means in Homeland Security too.

The President has said repeatedly (and he's absolutely right about this) no one can promise you that there will never be another terrorist incident. What you want is to try to keep big bad things from happening. You want no more 9/11's. So what does that mean in the context of Homeland Security? Surely it means more than just reorganizing a bunch of government departments into one. And one of the things that I was really, really sorry about is that all these panelists in the debate never asked either the President or Senator Kerry the hard questions about the debates that occurred in the last four years, why did the administration oppose doubling cargo container checks at ports and airports, paid for by a $5,000 reduction in the size of the tax cut of the 200,000 millionaires in the country from $88,000 to $83,000 a year. Why had we not done more to build up the capacity of first responders? Why were we taking 88,000 police off the street and ending the cops program at the very time when we need more first responders if there's a more traditional terrorist attack in America?

The only point I want to make is, everybody's for Homeland Security but you need to give it content. And as concerned American citizens, you need to know what you mean by it and if you mean stopping big bad things from happening, then you should be able to define in your own mind which policies are more likely, than not, to secure that goal. One of the biggest problems in America is today, we don't have adequate protection for our ports, our bridges, reinforcements for our tunnels. The subway under Madison Square Garden had to be shut down when the Republican Convention met there, because there was a $600 million dollar plan to reinforce all those tunnels, which meant that if they had been reinforced and somebody set off a bomb in the tunnel, it wouldn't shatter the ceiling overhead and cause Madison Square Garden to collapse. And the plans had been on the books and been developed for some time, but they weren't implemented. Should that or should that not be a priority?

I think clearly we should be checking more than 5% of the cargo containers at ports and airports because they're just open invitations to terrorists to put in small scale chemical, biological or nuclear materials.

I say this again, whether you are a Republican or a Democrat, this campaign was largely carried out on the broad-brush grounds of security, the management of Iraq, the economic issue, the healthcare plans that Senator Kerry outlined, which he did do pretty well, and so did the President outline his. And where you stood on things like gay marriage, which wasn't a big part of the debate but was a big part of the undercurrent of what was going on in much of America.

But these things I just mentioned to you. These are the things that members of the Congress, the White House staff, the Cabinet, the President himself have to deal with, and things that as citizens, you should know what you think about, and they will shape the future that we have together.

Now, I want to make a couple of other points. We've had two elections now with the country sharply divided. We won one popular vote by a little bit and not enough to stay out of the Supreme Court and then they won the popular vote. If those 4% of the people that changed, that made up their mind on the last day, had all decided that they didn't have to stay with the same President to have security and therefore they wanted to give into their yearnings for a different economic and healthcare policy, it would have been 51 to 48 the other way. So we're closely divided.

I still think there will be great opportunities for the parties and the leaders to work together. I had a Republican Congress in 6 of the 8 years I was President. We worked together across party lines to reform Welfare, to put more police on the street, to balance the budget and run surpluses, to give 5 million more children health insurance, to relieve the debt of the poorest countries in the world, get more incentives to invest in the poorest parts of America, the fight for freedom and against ethnic cleansing in Kosovo and Bosnia, in Northern Ireland and in the Middle East, to improve the environment and to strengthen our capacity to deal with terror. You can get a lot done if you work at it, and if we treat each other like people and listen to each other.

The second thing I want to say is, no matter how this election had come out, and I voted for John Kerry and I believed in the direction he wanted. But no matter how the election had come out, and how it did come out, the fundamental big sweeping currents shaping America and the world have not, will not and could not be changed by any election and must be dealt with by our existing political structure. What are those fundamental realities? Number one, that the world gets more interdependent every day; and number two, that America grows more diverse every day.

It is ironic that we're told that a certain kind of evangelical religious vote with a political program had such a decisive impact on an election at the time when America is growing more diverse religiously, racially, culturally, politically. And the world is growing more interdependence. But interdependence may be good or bad. Interdependence means we cannot escape each other. Interdependence means we trade all over the world. We travel all over the world. We get entertainment from all over the world. Interdependence means open borders, easy travel and easy immigration that helped make 9/11 possible. So it is clear that we have to try to move this interdependent world of ours in a direction that lifts the positive forces of interdependence and restrains the negative ones. That we move toward an integrated global community and at the same time, we try to manage America's diversity in a way that gets the benefit of our differences and still brings us together.

Now how do we do that? First of all, we do need a security policy to fight the terror networks, to limit the production of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, to define, confine, secure and possibly destroy the materials out of which those weapons are made and to continue to try to make this enterprise in Iraq a success. Because whether you agree with going there or not in the first place, if we left now, it would become the terrorist cesspool we were told it was before we went in. {COMMENT="Audience murmurs"} So whether you were for it or not, we need to try to make this thing work, and I think we can. I actually believe we can get more help from other countries in doing it, if we do it right.

A security strategy alone is not enough. Why? Because in an interdependent world, you cannot possibly kill, jail or occupy all your adversaries. Does anybody think we can? That we could possibly kill, jail or occupy all of our present or potential future adversaries? Therefore, in addition to security, we need a policy to try to make a world with more partners and fewer terrorists. How do we do that?

First, we need more institutional and international cooperation. I believe that our policy should be, “We may have to act alone from time to time. We're going to cooperate whenever we can and act alone only when we have to.” People ask me all the time, “Why are other people in the world mad at us? Is it just over Iraq?” No, it's over Iraq and our withdrawal from the Antiballistic Missile Treaty; our withdrawal from the Kyoto Climate Change Treaty; our withdrawal from the International Criminal Court; our refusal to strengthen the Biological Weapons Treaty.

It's over our telling Iran and North Korea they've got to give up their nuclear weapons, and at the same time, we're trying to develop two new nuclear weapons, that for the first time in the history of America, since the atomic bomb was first dropped in Japan and World War II. In the last four years, we have said we might use nuclear weapons first, and yet we're telling other people they've got to give them up. The signal we're giving is, “You better go get you some because we're getting some and we might use them on you.” {LAUGHTER} 

So you have to understand. I know America might have to act alone. I did it from time to time on my own, but it was never my first choice. We should cooperate whenever we can and act alone only when we have to, and built up these institutions of cooperation and if there's something wrong with them, improve them. Don't walk away from them.

The third thing we have to do is to keep making America better, that's why I talked about the issues I did earlier. And we have to find some unity across all these lines that divide us. We've got red States and blue States, red people and blue people. {LAUGHTER} The truth of us, the truth is nearly everybody on earth is a little red and a little blue, depending on how you read that. And this is crazy for us to be treating each other this way.

How can we find unity at home and how can we build a world that is more of an integrated community? I believe with a simple strategy of sharing. We have to share the responsibilities. We have to share the benefits and we have to have a certain set of shared values that will encompass everyone's religious faith or non-religious search for the truth. Simple values. Everyone counts. Everyone deserves a chance. Everyone has a role to play. We all do better when we work together. Our differences do matter and they're worth arguing over and defending, but in the end, our common humanity matters more.

Now, I want to just close with this thought. To the young people who agree with my politics who may be discouraged, I say to you that when I was your age, I never thought my party would ever elect a President again and I got to do it twice. So you need to keep {APPLAUSE} You need to be of good heart. We got beat a lot worse than this in the 80's. {LAUGHTER} This is-- We're going to be all right here, if we just keep our heads on straight and keep figuring out why we didn't make the sale this time and how to do it next time and start thinking about what's good for America and what we can do to contribute to that.

To those of you who are in the other party and who voted for President Bush, I say to you, I've been in politics a long time and I've been beat as well as elected, and it's a long road that doesn't turn. So don't take this too seriously. {LAUGHTER} I mean this in this way. You may believe, as some of them said, that you represented only-- That you were the only choice for morality and strength and all that stuff. But in your heart of hearts you know that can't quite be right. We can't quite be as bad as we were painted. It can't quite be right to do what was done in 2002 to the Democratic Senator from Georgia, Max Cleland, who-- {LAUGHTER} Who is a friend of mine and who gave up both his legs, just below the hip, and his arm, one of his arms in Vietnam. And because he wouldn't vote for the Homeland Security Bill that the President put before the Congress (which he, the President himself, had opposed for 8 months before), then he decided he was for it. Then they tried to use it to strip the civil service protections of 170,000 Federal workers, who had nothing to do with Homeland Security. So Max said, “Hey, I didn't leave half my body in Vietnam to come home and pretend to make people secure by taking their job rights away.” And they ran an ad in Georgia, when people were still scared about September the 11th, with just his face, not his body, comparing him to Saddam Hussein. And the man that beat him was like me, he had a deferment. So I say to you, you got away with it in 2002. And there was a lot of that sort of component in some of the elections this year. But you should be humble. Power is a fleeting thing. Nobody lives forever. Nobody has it forever. In the end the Constitution and the circumstances of life bring us back to a dynamic center. We have got to find a way forward together.

And to all of you, I say this. After all I went through in the 8 years I was President, on the day I walked out of the White House for the last time, I was more idealistic about this country and the prospects of America and the world for the 21st Century, than I was on the day I walked in. {APPLAUSE}

I believe essentially there's nothing that free people of good will can't figure out how to deal with. I know some of this stuff is scary. But look, there's way more good than bad in the modern world, way more good than bad. You've just got to figure out how to beat down the bad and lift up the good.
And I'll just close with this story, more for my side, I guess, than the other. {LAUGHTER} But it'll keep you in a good humor. At the beginning of World War II, when Adolph Hitler attacked Poland in 1939, and Britain was alone in Europe because France was overrun and at the time Russia was still neutral. The war had not really broken out in Asia and the whole future of western civilization seemed to hang on the grittiness and will of the British people, held together by Winston Churchill. And he desperately needed America to come and help him and Roosevelt desperately wanted to go in and help him, but he knew that the American people still were not prepared to go to war against the Nazis. And he knew he had to find a way to get enough help to Churchill to keep him alive and keep him going until some defining event, in our case Pearl Harbor, catapulted us into the stream of history.

You can just imagine that all this was cold comfort for Churchill who literally didn't know from one month to the next whether the British were going to survive. But he was a jolly old rascal, and they asked him whether he was impatient with America and with Roosevelt. And keep in mind, they were getting killed in all these battles, and Hitler's acting like he's going to take over the whole world. Churchill looked at the Press and smiled, and he said, “No. I do not worry.” He said, “The United States of America invariably does the right thing, after exhausting every other alternative.” {APPLAUSE}

So whether you're in the crowd that thinks we're doing the right thing or you're in the crowd that thinks we're still exhausting alternatives, {LAUGHTER} just remember this. You have your voice. You have your heart. You have your mind, and I hope I got you to think about some things tonight that need to be thought about. But don't worry about the future, just work on it. Thank you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
