{title} Remarks at Music Center Speaker Series {/title}
{event} Music Center Speaker Series {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} March 2, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. {LAUGHTER ; CHEERS} Thank you. You need to calm down. You'll have me thinking I'm President again. {APPLAUSE} I want to begin by thanking Zev Yaroslavsky, whom I've known for many years and admired for a long time, for that introduction and for his lifetime of service to Los Angeles and my great friend, John Emerson, who, when he worked for me in the White House was affectionately known as the Secretary of California. {LAUGHTER} He became the only state to have a Cabinet Master. {LAUGHTER} Every day it was something else. {LAUGHTER} Defense conversion, the healthcare crisis, Northridge. I once asked John what I was supposed to do for the other 49 States after I gave him all the money he wanted. {LAUGHTER} He said he didn't care. {LAUGHTER} So I'm glad he's home where he belongs {LAUGHTER} and whatever you do for him, you'll never get even, I promise you that. {LAUGHTER} 
We're going to have questions and answers later, so what I would like to try to do in a few moments is to basically describe in broad terms where I think we are in the 21st Century world, where America is and in general, without being too detailed, what I think we ought to do about it. Then you may want to have questions about specifics.

I just got back from a 10-country tour of Asia, which I did in 13 days, which is prima facie evidence of insanity, I think {LAUGHTER} for a person in my age and condition. But anyway, I had a good time. I began by going to Thailand, to Indonesia, to Sri Lanka and the Maldives with former President Bush on an official U.S. government mission to look at the tsunami-affected areas to see how the aid the American people have given is being spent, what is being done for the long-term reconstruction and to get some feel for what now has to be done. And starting next week, I will become, at the request of Secretary General Kofi Annan, the UN envoy for long-term reconstruction of the tsunami-affected areas {APPLAUSE} and I thought I would talk to you a little about this. Because I want you to think about this.

First of all, a staggering $700 million dollars was given in Tsunami Relief by private citizens in America, a lot of the money was given in large dollars. A financial institution in New York City, in which some friends of mine are involved, called and said, “We want to help but we've decided to give you a day's profit so that all 1,800 of our employees can participate.” They had a pretty good day. They made $3 million dollars yesterday and I I think they wished they'd picked another day when they did it. {LAUGHTER} So we have all these big contributions but what you should know is-- This is a very important fact about the modern world. One-third of all American households gave something to Tsunami Relief. Over half of them gave over the Internet. It's funny. In that sense, it paralyzed paralleled what happened in the 2004 elections, which as a matter of political science will go down in our history because it was the first time since the importance of big money and presidential elections for advertising costs that both parties raised massive amounts of money in small amounts. And for the first time the Democrats raised more than the Republicans did in small amounts {APPLAUSE} but both raised Both raised absolutely stunning amounts because of the technology of the Internet, which is democratizing political finance, and in this case, democratizing international aid and assistance.

Now think about that for a moment. What else has been in the headlines? The Iraqi elections. The murder of the leader of the opposition in Lebanon, Rafik Hariri, who was a very good friend of mine and who spent an hour with me 10 days before he was killed. What happened? It boomeranged on the assassins. The Lebanese government fell and the government of Syria has said they're going to have to get out of Lebanon, which is what Hariri wanted. {APPLAUSE}
In the Middle East, the Palestinians have had genuinely democratic elections. Their Israeli government approved a plan to withdraw from Gaza. President Bush recommended, something I strongly support, $350 million dollars in aid to the Palestinians because one of the big problems we've got in keeping the peace process going is you can't do all this stuff overnight. Meanwhile the Palestinians are getting younger and poorer, so there needs to be some economic aid there. Even Egypt said it's going to have some sort of elections now.

Hillary just got back from a trip to Afghanistan, Iraq and India and in Afghanistan, the elected President there is doing very well indeed. Something over 20 al Qaeda cells have been taken down since 9/11, combined with the 20 we took down after 1998, the operational capacity of al Qaeda has been substantially eroded. What does all that tell you about the world you live in? How would you characterize the 21st Century world?

When I left office and the economy was booming most people would have said it's about globalization and they would have meant the interconnections of the economy. But now we see that it goes way beyond economics. The brilliant job the global media did of covering the tsunami and the advent of the multiple uses of the Internet led to this enormous human outpouring, not just in our country, but throughout Asia. Other countries that identified with their neighbors being hurt, and then Northern Europe, where hundreds and hundreds of Scandinavian tourists were killed while they were vacationing in the affected areas. There is a higher degree of interdependence in the world today than ever before in human history, and that is, to me, the key word for the 21st Century. It goes way beyond economics. We simply cannot escape each other, and that's all interdependence means. For good or ill, we are tied together and we know it and we understand it, even if we don't explicitly talk about it.

Interdependence can be very good. For America in the 1990's, it was wonderful. We got a third of our growth through global trade. We got a third of our income gains through high technology, even though 8%, only 8% of our work force is directly involved in high-tech jobs. India now has the biggest middle class in the world, largely because of the magnetizing impact of the seven big high-tech centers in India, where they now produce over half the software in the world.

When China faced the SARS epidemic beginning in Hong Kong, the government's original intention was to deny it, then there was a citizen revolt over the Internet. The most amazing thing you ever saw, even though they tried to control access to the Internet and the websites and the government was forced to change its position. After which, they decided it wasn't such a bad thing to be more open and they began getting more open about AIDS. They invited my Foundation in to work. I just got back from China, where I think the Chinese government probably has the most comprehensive anti-AIDS effort of any government with a major problem anywhere in the world, all because of global interdependence.

The point I want to make about it is simply this. Interdependence can be good or bad. Most of the examples I decided to use are good. But if you look at the Middle East, where the people are completely interdependent, we had seven years of progress toward peace when I was President. Then their second Intifada was launched and for four years it was horrible. In the eight years I was in office, 258 Israelis were killed by terrorists. We got out. The situation deteriorated and in the next four years, almost 1,100 Israelis were killed and over 4,000 Palestinians. But they were no less interdependent in those four years than they were in the previous eight. It's just that the interdependence shifted from positive to negative. Now it's, we hope, shifted back to positive again.

The point I want to make about this is that interdependence is an inherently unstable circumstance. It can be positive or negative, or in many cases, both at the same time. Therefore it seems to me that the big job in the 21st Century world is to move from simple interdependence to a more integrated set of communities, at home and around the world. In an integrated community you have three things that enable you to deal with all the problems that come up and all the differences within and beyond our boarders. You have shared responsibilities, shared benefits and simple shared values: everyone counts, everyone deserves a chance, everyone has a responsible role to play. Competition is good but we all do better when we work together. And finally, our differences are important, they matter. They make life more interesting. They enable us to search for the truth. They matter, but our common humanity matters more.

Now it seems to me that that is the framework that we ought to be looking at every issue through and it certainly is the framework that I use to organize my life, the work I do with my Foundation and the way I evaluate ever political issue in America and around the world. I ask myself, “Will this help to advance the cause of shared responsibilities, shared benefits and shared values?” Will it help whatever it is? The various Social Security reform packages. Will it help to move us from interdependence to a more integrated community? And so that's what I'd like you to think about.

Now how would we go about doing that? I think there are four or five things that have to be done. One is we need an integrative approach to security; a cooperative approach in the world to fight terror, restrict the spread of weapons of mass destruction and help build all the defective Democratic governments. Second, we need to build a world with more partners and fewer terrorists, which essentially means we need to implement the so-called Millennium Development Goals that we started to develop when I was President, that were later adopted in 2001. How do we reduce poverty, spread education, deal with the healthcare crisis, deal with the environmental crises of the world and live people together? It's a big problem.

Half the world's people live on less than $2.00 a day. In India, it's the only place I know where this has happened. There was an upset victory for the opposition party in the last election, ironically, because of the economic success of India. I can never remember it happening before. Why is that? Because there are a billion people in the country and 350 million in the middle class and the other 650 watch television. {LAUGHTER} You know, it's great that they're doing well, but we're not. So they return the Congress party to power and Mr. Singh became the Prime Minister. He was the architect of the original modernization efforts of the Indian economy back in 1991, shortly before I was elected. So they hired him to figure out how to spread the benefits of India's prosperity to a larger group. It's a major, major challenge everywhere in the world, and one that I worked on with my Foundation in India and elsewhere.

There are 130 million kids that never go to school. It wouldn't cost much money to put them in school. As a corollary benefit, if they're working, they're taking them out of the factories and putting their parents in. But it's a serious issue.

If you look at the healthcare issues of the world, one-quarter of all the people who die on earth this year, in spite of all you see about the wars and the tsunami disasters and everything else. A quarter of all the deaths on earth will come from AIDS, TB, Malaria and infections related to diarrhea, most of them are little kids that never got a clean glass of water. One in four people on earth never get clean water, something you take for granted when you go home tonight. When you turn on the tap tonight, think about that one in four people can't do what you will do before you go to bed tonight. So I think it's really important.

My Foundation works on AIDS, in India and China, five African countries, with about 35% of the cases there, including Rwanda, Tanzania, Mozambique, Lesotho and South Africa. We work in the Caribbean. Our first project in the Bahamas, I just visited. In two years, we quadrupled the number of people getting medicine and the death rate was cut in half.

The point I want to make about this is not that we're doing a good job (although I think we are), it is that these diseases are preventable and when not prevented, are treatable and the cost of doing so is far less than fighting any war anywhere, but the benefits may be greater over the long run. {APPLAUSE} So I think you have to think about that.

Now, so we need a security strategy, a strategy for more partners and fewer terrorists. We need to build up the institutions of international cooperation: the United Nations, the financial institutions, all kinds of other institutions. People used to almost make fun of me when I was President because Whenever people decided to get together, I supported it. You may find this hard to believe, but when I became President, a lot of Americans were against the European Union. Because they knew that if Europe ever became united economically and politically they would be bigger than the United States. You know, my view was it still had to be good for us. We weren't going to be the only military, economic and political superpower in the world forever and we should want people who are successful to share our values and work with us. So I supported the European Union {APPLAUSE} and the expansion of NATO and the rebuilding of the former communist countries and lots of other networking organizations. We need these organizations.

Whether you believe the Iraq conflict was right or wrong, is almost besides the point. When I was in law school and we studied by the so-called case method, where we tried to find a general rule of law that embodied in an important case, the Professors used to say, almost as an offhand remark, that hard cases make bad law. And what that meant is that even if the case was decided correctly, if it was a particularly difficult one, it was hard to apply generally. So in the case of Iraq, again, whether you think it's right or wrong, the whole world now has a stake in it succeeding and 60% of the people did show up and vote and had that wonderful ink on their fingers and risked their lives to do it. But we clearly can't do that everywhere. We can't have a preemptive war every time there's some place we don't like what's going on. So we need-- We need the-- {APPLAUSE}

For example, and the administration understands this. For example, now we need Europeans to help us solve the Iranian nuclear problem. It's a huge problem. But the President's made it clear that, you know, we're going to bend over backwards to let this diplomatic initiative, by the British, the French and the Germans, have full sway to try to solve it. The North Korean nuclear problem is a significant and thorny problem. We can't solve it without help from the Chinese. And I could give you lots of other examples. So on the whole, as you look to the future and we have more and more of these kinds of problems, we'll have to find ways to solve them, usually through cooperative means and therefore we need to think about how to strength these institutions. The problem for the United States is that at the moment we're still more powerful militarily than most places and when you join a club, you have to play by the rules, which means you by definition constrain your own freedom of action. So arguably it costs us more to join a club today than anyone else because we're more likely than not to have to forego some freedom of action in order to get the benefits of the common endeavor. But I think almost always it's worth it. That's why

You know, even though it was a flawed agreement, I thought the Kyoto Agreement on Climate Change did more good than harm and I supported it. {APPLAUSE} And why I think we should be in the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and not trying to develop any new nuclear weapons. {APPLAUSE} Something, by the way something your Senior Senator, Dianne Feinstein has raised more Cain about than anybody else in the United States Congress and I'm proud of her for doing it. {APPLAUSE}

But apart from the specifics, you get the idea here. If you cannot kill, jail or occupy all your enemies, sooner or later you have to make a deal. You have to figure out {LAUGHTER} how to cooperate with people. And I think it's quite possible this Iraqi thing will work out. Iraq will stay together. They'll build a genuinely representative democracy. It will not be an Islamic fundamentalist regime. It's quite possible that it could work out and all of us should want it to work out. But it cost $200 billion dollars. By the time it's over, it will cost us as much as World War I did in constant dollars and therefore it's not something we can do every day, everywhere, whether you think it was good or bad. So we have to try to find other ways to work with people to achieve our common objectives in a more secure, more peaceful world.

The forth thing we have to do is to keep trying to make America a model for the world. That means we have to keep coming together. We have to keep becoming not just interdependent, but integrated. And the two political parties in America today have significant differences between them about how best to do that and are more or less evenly divided by numbers.

If you look at the last election, I'll just make a couple of political points about it. The predictions of the demise of the Democrats are somewhat premature. In fact, we're doing much better than we did in the 70's and 80's. In '80, '84 and '88, we had three Presidential elections where we never won more than 10 States. So we won in '92 and '96. We won the popular vote in 2000, and in 2004, got four-- {APPLAUSE} Listen. In 2004, got 48% of the vote and President Bush, his reelection margin was the smallest of any incumbent President since Woodrow Wilson in 1916. We have never turned out a sitting President in the middle of an ongoing conflict. So on the one hand, the predictions of the demise of the Democrats as a presidential party are not based on historic evidence.

On the other hand, my party's in much worse shape in the Congress, because the culturally conservative voters, who once believed they were almost religiously mandated to vote for Republicans for President, now think that runs down to Senate and House members too. And since every state gets two Senators and the cultural conservatives are highly concentrated in less popular States in small towns and rural areas, gives them a huge advantage in the Congressional election. So we have to think about the two different parties in their approaches and whether there is some way for us to build not just an interdependent America but one that's more of a community. And we have to deal with the different approaches there.

You know, I believe that we were doing the right thing to strive for a community that gave opportunity to every responsible citizen and it respected all different people's belief and tried to work on things we could agree on, like stability for middle class families, opportunity for all young people, security for seniors. I thought the role of government was to create the conditions and give people the tools to make the most of their own lives and then help those, who through no fault of their own, couldn't help themselves. The contrary view is that we ought to, in effect, invest everything possible in the hands of individuals, from their own retirement, security, to their own healthcare to whatever because we're living in a world where national government protections are increasingly irrelevant and we have more and more concentration of wealth and power in the hands of private interests.

And the other issue is what to do about conflicting social values, moral values. Should they be used as a source of division? Or should there be some way of trying to come together? For example, one of the things that amazed me is that nobody, at least as far as I knew. Nobody in 2004, when they were debating abortions, seemed to know that when I was President, the number of abortions went down by 22% without eroding the right to choose because of other policies we had to support young, single mothers and their parents in helping to raise their grandchildren and the whole range of things. But the point is there are a lot of things you can do to bring people together {APPLAUSE} that hadn't even been talked about.
For tonight's purposes, I ask you-- If you want to talk about any of the details, I'll be happy to in the questions. But the point I want you think about is this. When I read in the press, conflicting proposals on Social Security, for example; or on healthcare; or on drug benefits; or on anything, I see that, just as I do, “What should our Middle East peace policy be?” Through the prism of the obligation we have to move from interdependence to an integrated community. And I ask myself, “Which specific proposals are more likely to produce shared responsibilities, shared benefits and reinforced shared values?” And therefore it becomes easier for me to sort through all this because I have a certain philosophy about where I think the world ought to go and I think you should as well.

Two final points. First of all, whoever wins whatever election, you should know that you have more options to impact the course of the future at home, in Los Angeles, and around the world than ever before and you should cease them. In my Foundation, we basically work on things that would advance the Millennium development goals: bringing economic opportunity to poor people at home and around the world; fighting AIDS around the world; promoting religious and racial reconciliation in Northern Ireland, the Middle East, the Balkans, other places where I work; advancing the education and citizen service. We're working on all this stuff and trying to advance these ideas at my Library, as well as through my Foundation in Harlem. But all of you can do something like that. Remember, a third of American households gave money to Tsunami Relief.

And there are three things that happened in the 1990's, for which I can't claim particular credit, but that made this possible, that made you more powerful. One is for the first time in history, more people than not, more than half the people on earth, lived under governments they voted in. So this movement toward democracy in the last couple of years is basically building on the explosion of democracy that happened after the fall of the Berlin Wall. And it is a process that is not reversible in general, although it is in particular, if they're a fail state, which is why I spend sometime trying to help new democracies succeed. That's the first thing that happened.

The second thing that happened was the explosion of non-governmental organizations (so-called NGO's) at home and abroad. If you form a group to have a Civic Center and promote debates like this, you're an NGO. I remember one day, not long after I left the White House and I'd undertaken my first Foundation project. I was shaving one morning and I looked in the mirror and I said, “My God. I'm an NGO.” {LAUGHTER} But literally there are

For example, when President, former President Bush and I went to the tsunami-affected areas, we found there were literally hundreds, hundreds of NGO's, who through their own devices, out of their own convictions had gone to Sri Lanka or Aichi and Indonesia or some other affected area, to try to change the course of history. I used to go to Central America or Turkey or lots of other places. I always asked to meet with some NGO leaders, because I knew they could, could literally shape the future.

And the third thing is, as I mentioned, is the use of the Internet as a democratizing tool. It really gives enormous power to people almost on an ad hoc basis as the issues come up. So there's something for all of you to do.

And the last point I want to make is that I think on balance you should be optimistic about the future. Now human beings first rose on the African Savanna (they're now debating it based on the most recent architectural evidence), but somewhere around, between 100 150,000 years ago. It now appears that we looked like people before we thought like people. But anyway, somewhere between 100 150,000 years ago. Ever since people banded together, first in families and clans and came out of caves, people have found it difficult to deal with the others, people who were different from them. There's been a continuing conflict between how you should deal with people that are different. Should you cooperate with them or should you fight them? There was a perverse parallel development from the dawn of human history all the way through the 20th Century where the circles of cooperation kept getting wider and wider and wider but the means people had to destroy each other kept getting more and more powerful. So that in the 21st Century, we nearly got it wrong. We had two World Wars. We had massive, massive killings, not just the Holocaust but in the former Soviet Union. You had all those purges. You had the one huge one in China, and the feel of the outcome was in doubt.

Notwithstanding the rise of terror and the continuing threat of weapons of mass destruction, I think very few people believe that in the 21st Century, it's more likely than not that we will destroy each other. And we now know because of the cooperative efforts to sequence the human genome that we're all more than 99% the same genetically and we know that the variances of people, the genetic variances of individuals within ethnic groups are greater than the profiled variances of one ethnic group than another, something we didn't know before. So it turns out the religious teachings of all faiths, through all ages, have a scientific basis and fact that our common humanity matters more than our differences. And we have a {APPLAUSE} , we have always managed to find a way to cooperate, to find common ground, to find a way forward instead of to consume ourselves in self-destruction.

And I think as a whole the people on earth will probably follow a wry comment Winston Churchill made about the United States in the beginning of World War II when people in the press kept asking him over and over, when America was not in the war. You know, we didn't join the war until '41, so it was underway for two years and two months essentially before we got in. And people kept saying, “Well, what about the United States? What about the United States?” And Britain hadn't won any battles for the first year or so. And Churchill finally said in exasperation, “The United States always does the right thing, after exhausting every other alternative.” {APPLAUSE} We're still in a period where we, we as a nation, and we as a world, are determined to exhaust some more alternatives. {LAUGHTER} 

But on the whole, you should be quite encouraged. If you look at what's happened just since the fall of the Berlin Wall, we've been reconciled largely to our old Cold War adversaries. You have the rise of democracy; you have the raise of democratization through the Internet and the NGO's. You have a sense of common purpose in the world in dealing with climate change and stopping genocide and dealing with all these social problems, that simply didn't exist even 15 years ago, even when I became President, people are always-- All these problems we just can't deal with. So on the whole, you should feel quite optimistic, but you should remember that nothing ever happens by accident. And therefore it's important that we do the right things.

But tonight, I want to ask you when you leave here, if you don't agree with me, that the number one characteristic of the world is interdependence and the number one job of the world is to move from interdependence to integrated communities of shared responsibilities, benefits and values, then you need some other way to look at the world. You need to ask yourself what your worldview is going to be. Because otherwise you'll go crazy trying to figure out what the specific answer is to all these problems you're going to be presented with. Whereas, if you have a worldview that dictates basically where you want to go, it will become much easier to analyze every single thing you read about in the press. Because you can ask yourself whether, if you take this or that alternative, it will take you where you want to go. I think it's more complicated being a citizen of the United States than ever before. But we have access to more information than ever before, in forums like this, so I think we should be able to do the job. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
