{title} Remarks to the Nigerian Parliament {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} October 6, 2002 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. First, that was a remarkable set of comments. I thank you for your remarks. To my good friend, President Obasanjo, the chairman of ECOWAS, the Chairman of this Nigerian Institute for International Affairs Board. I loved waving that white handkerchief. You know, in my country and generally in Western culture, when someone waves a white handkerchief, it's a symbol of military surrender. I don't believe that's what you meant by that. {LAUGHTER} I didn't experience that "surrender feeling" when you waved that to the ministers of the government, the members of the national assembly, and our distinguished master of ceremonies. It's a great blessing for me to be back in Nigeria. I love it here. I've come here so often in the last two years, I am reliably informed that if I appear again within the next six months, I will have to pay taxes. {LAUGHTER} The people at the airport don't have to look at my passport anymore.

And I get to drive into the city on President Clinton Drive. Now that I'm a former President with no power, I wonder if they only put up the street signs when I come in. {LAUGHTER} I am delighted to be here with a large delegation of my fellow citizens seated over there, including business people, former members of my government, one former member of my cabinet, Secretary of Transportation Rodney Slater, two American movie stars, Kevin Spacey and Chris Tucker, who I'm trying to convince to make movies in Nigeria, {APPLAUSE} and who also do imitations of me. If you want them to give the speech, they could do it, and if you close your eyes, you couldn't tell the difference. {LAUGHTER} When I came here in 2000, President Obasanjo not only did me the honor of naming a road after me, he gave me a new name as well. Let's see if I can remember how to pronounce it. {LAUGHTER} Sodangi Okora Omowale. {APPLAUSE} Relating to love for the people, courage and my homecoming to Africa.

On the same trip, I visited a village where the tribal chief gave me another name, Don Masani Ushafra, which I was told means the knowledgeable one. You can't imagine how wonderful these names were to me. Back in America, people call me other names all the time--none were favorable -- {LAUGHTER} , and I like these much better. {APPLAUSE} It was my honor to make Africa a bigger priority for the United States than ever before. I did it out of more than sentiment. I simply could not imagine how the children of America could grow up and live their dreams in the 21st century unless the children of Africa could do the same. We worked hard in my years in office for peace in Eritrea and Ethiopia. We promoted the Africa Crisis Response Initiative that trained more than 6,000 African peacekeepers during my time in office. We supported peacekeeping efforts in Liberia and Sierra Leone. I went to Tanzania with President Mandela for the Burundi peace conference.

We worked for the cease-fire in the Congo and provided millions to OAU for conflict management programs. We worked to halt the trade in illegal diamonds and provided about 120 million dollars a year over eight years to support democracy programs across this great continent. We gave special attention to democracy, to security and human rights issues in Angola, to the post-apartheid political and economic transition in South Africa, and to democratic transition right here in Nigeria. As has been said, we implemented a new trade policy for America with the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act that provides duty free treatment to virtually all products exported to the United States from sub-Saharan Africa. We forgave bilateral debt of 500 million dollars for African countries and led the G.8 in establishing the Millennium Debt Relief Initiative, which already has helped 25 nations, many in Africa, with debt relief savings for health, education, and development. We tripled our overseas AIDS efforts and supported the South African court case, which led to the drug companies' commitments to provide cheaper anti-retroviral drugs as well as those that prevent the transmission of HIV from mother to child.

I consider this work that we did in Africa among the most important things I did in my eight years as president. It is still important and I am still trying to do what I can through my foundation. Since I left office, I have worked with President Mandela to co-chair the International AIDS Trust, to bring all the energy and resources we can along with those of other former heads of state and government to the fight against HIV and AIDS. In a few days, President Mandela and I are also launching a South African version of America's community service program for young people, AmeriCorps. It will bring young black and white South Africans together to work together day-by-day for at least a year to solve the problems of their local cities, towns and villages.

I just left Ghana with the great Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto, who is working around the world to create new legal frameworks to allow the poor of the world to use five trillion dollars of assets they have in their homes, their businesses and their farms. Because most of these assets have no legal title, they cannot be used as collateral for credit to expand their own livelihoods and the economies of their countries. De Soto has worked around the world to change this. We just came from launching a program appropriately called the Foundation for Building Capital for the Poor in Ghana. I hope this will spread all across Africa. I believe it to be the single most important idea in the world today for internally generated economic development.

This is my third visit to Nigeria. When General Abubucar kept his promise to hold free elections, and when President Obasanjo became the freely democratically leader of this nation, I invited him to the White House. I told him that on the day he was inaugurated President, I was out West and had to rise very early in the morning to hear his inaugural speech. As I remember, I got up at about a quarter to four but I was not disappointed. And I told him in the White House that I would like to come to Nigeria because it was important to America's future and that of the world. So, in August of 2000, we had a wonderful visit, one I will always remember for the warmth of the people, for the culture and music--which I especially loved--and for the promise of the future. Last year, I was honored to return when you hosted the African AIDS Conference, which was a historic event because of Secretary General Kofi Anan's call for the developed world to contribute 10 billion dollars a year to fighting AIDS, TB, malaria and other infectious diseases.

I am back today because I know Nigeria will play a crucial role in shaping the 21st century. We live in a world that is highly interdependent but not yet integrated. I would like to explain what I mean by that. Trade, open borders, easy travel, immigration, and the spread of technology have brought us closer together than ever before. But there are still profound divisions in this world--in the economic, social, political and philosophical realms. We saw that on September 11th in the United States when a group with very different values and interests than most of us share—al Qaeda—used the forces of interdependence. They used open borders and easy travel, as well as easy access to information and technology, to murder 3,100 people from 70 nations, including over 200 other Muslims in the United States.

In less obvious ways, we see it every day. The global economy has lifted more people out of poverty in the last 20 years than ever before, yet half the world's people still live on less than two dollars a day. Education has benefited people in both poor and rich countries more than ever before, but 130 million children never go to school at all. Health advances have led to a decline in infant mortality and a rise in life expectancy even in the world's poorest countries, but ten million children die every year of preventable childhood diseases, and one in four of all the people who die this year on earth will die of AIDS, TB, malaria and infections related to diarrhea. Most of them are little children, who never got a single clean glass of water in their lives. For the first time in history, more than half the world's people, like Nigerians, live under governments they elected themselves, yet still the world is gripped by ancient conflicts rooted in racial, religious, ethnic and tribal differences. These ancient differences are colored by the awesome prospect that some day these conflicts may be fought with chemical, biological and small scale nuclear weapons.

So, we have at the dawn of the 21st century great promise, great peril, great hope, great frustration, and a battle between the forces of chaos and cooperation, between those of conflict and those of community. This is the principle struggle of the early part of the new millennium. Unlike conflicts of the past, which were fought between nations and empires, this struggle goes on within every nation, and it involves all nations— those that enjoy peace, stability, democracy and prosperity, those with dictatorships, conflicts and desperate poverty; those hovering somewhere in between: those with wealth whose people are not yet wealthy, those with democracies whose freedoms are not yet secure, those who desire peace whose people still live in conflict. Africa is the central battleground of this new world between the forces of integration and those of disintegration. As you said General, those of us in the developed world and especially in the United States who have prospered from the age of interdependence have very, very heavy responsibilities.

We are not doing nearly as much as we should to advance the economies of the developing world with aid, trade, targeted debt relief, and constructive plans to foster private investments. We are not doing as much as we should to find proven programs to put all the world's children in school, or proven programs to fight infectious diseases and provide a decent health system everywhere, or proven programs not only to fight terrorism but to cooperate in a way that will build a world with more partners and fewer terrorists.

But there are also steps that must be taken by the nations that are struggling themselves. In the last year, there have been many positive developments in Africa. First and foremost, NEPAD, the New Partnership for African Development, a truly African initiative with the responsibilities of African nations defined by Africa, not demanded by the West. There has been significant progress in the Congo, something that has been very important for the entire continent. And there was the launch of the African Union with its commitment to self-monitoring to ensure openness and the rule of law, to open elections and the ending of human rights abuses, and to a mechanism for peer review to enforce those commitments. As we all know, Zimbabwe has been an especially stern test of those commitments. This is an issue far more difficult for many Africans because it is woven into the matter of land reform, an issue still alive in several countries in Southern Africa. And as you know better than I, sometimes these issues have to be worked more behind the scenes than in the public arena. Because I know what has happened here over the last couple of days, I want to thank President Obasanjo for his tireless and often thankless efforts to keep working towards the right results in Zimbabwe.

In the end, President Mugabe must be held to the African Union standard of free and fair elections so that Africa can send a clear message across the continent and across the world that no matter how heroic one's past actions, no matter how great the solidarity one feels from fighting past battles, no matter how much there are legitimate grievances entwined with land reform or any other issue, it is simply no longer acceptable to inflame racial divisions, to intimidate opponents, to rig elections or to manipulate results. The essence of democracy is not just winning power legitimately, it is also knowing when to let go. {APPLAUSE}

The situation in Zimbabwe is a burden to all of Africa, including Nigeria, not only because of the increased interdependence of the nation and peoples, but also because of the fact that around the world, there are still too many people who engage in what I would call the regrettable practice of continental profiling. They hear about something bad happening somewhere in Africa and automatically impute it to all of Africa. It is not fair. It is based upon ignorance but it is a fact nonetheless, one that has consequences for foreign policy decisions and financial decisions by investors from other parts of the world.

So, I urge Nigeria to continue to be a leader for democracy in Africa. History already has recorded your role in this. More than 40 years ago, you were among the first on the continent to find liberation. You then emerged from a painful civil war to build your future. Mr. President, I don't know if I've ever told you this but when the Nigerian Civil War ended almost 33 years ago, I was a young student traveling in Russia. On the night the announcement was made, I was having dinner--fish and rice--I still remember what I was eating {LAUGHTER} with Nigerian students from warring tribes, who went to Lumumba University in Moscow before the war began and were trapped there during the entire conflict knowing their families were killing each other. We were listening to music when all of a sudden, the radio was interrupted and the man made an announcement in Russian.

I didn't understand a word of Russian but I knew what had happened when these people broke into tears and began to embrace each other. I will never forget that as long as I live. And today, when you have these fights, I wish someone could remember the looks that I saw in those young students' eyes, 21, 22 years old, given their lives back because for a moment, anyway. All those people from different tribes decided that their common humanity was more important than whatever differences brought them to kill. {APPLAUSE} Nigeria was the leading African opponent of white-ruled governments in South Africa, Rhodesia and Namibia. Lagos was the headquarters of many African liberation movements. You fought for independence in Angola and Mozambique-- you did all this. And just as you led the move for independence across Africa, you can lead a second wave of African liberation not from colonial power, but from home grown oppression. {APPLAUSE}

Of course, as I used to remind my fellow Americans when we wanted to give lessons to other people, before you can do good elsewhere, you must be good at home. {APPLAUSE} As an outsider and someone who hasn't been out of office so long, I do not forget how hard politics and change can be. I am reluctant to offer any advice at all. But as your friend, I am compelled to make some observations that I hope will help. Because of your history, your size, your diversity of region, religion, language, your 250 ethnic groups, Nigeria is one of the most important and pivotal countries in the entire world. All clear thinking people are pulling for you and your future. It is a formidable task. I was President of a democracy over 200 years old. Your political ancestors gave you no such inheritance. When it comes to freedom, they left you in debt.

I'm reminded of something President Kennedy once said. He had the ability to find humor in almost any situation. Shortly after he took office he said, and I quote, “what surprised me most after we took office was that we found out things were just as bad as we had been saying they were.” {LAUGHTER} Well, the bad news about democracy is that it never brings change fast enough. The good news is that without it, it's almost impossible to bring any lasting change at all. {APPLAUSE} Winston Churchill once said, “democracy is the worst of all forms of government except for all the others.” {LAUGHTER} And so as a friend, let me suggest that there are five areas in which I believe Nigeria can be a great example to the world.

First you can show the world how a populist and promising but still struggling nation can halt and reverse the spread of HIV and AIDS. More than 40 million men, women and children now have HIV and AIDS with 15,000 more infected every day. 25 million have died with 8,000 more dying every day. 14 million boys and girls have lost one or both parents. If current trends continue, another 65 million people will die of AIDS by 2020, and well before that over 100 million people around the world will have the disease. While two-thirds of the cases are still in Africa, it is no longer anywhere close to an African problem. The fastest growing rates of AIDS are in the nations of the former Soviet Union on Europe's back door. The second fastest growing rates of AIDS are in the 15 nations of the Caribbean on America's front door. My wife represents 600,000 people from the Dominican Republic alone in the Senate from New York State. So, we have a global problem on our hand. This year or next year, India will have as many cases as South Africa. And I need not remind you it is a country with a billion people. If it had the same infection rate as South Africa, 30 million people in India alone would have AIDS.

The world desperately needs models of nations that do not engage in denial, and it also needs help from countries like ours with paying for the medicine, the health care, the education, and the prevention programs. We cannot lose the war on AIDS and win our battles to enhance health, reduce poverty, expand education, or promote stability and democracy. Nigeria has already set a sterling example. I will never forget in 2000 when President Obasanjo and I had a meeting on AIDS and two people spoke: a young 16 year old girl who was serving as a peer counselor at a time when many other countries were still denying the problem exists-- she was wonderful. And a remarkable man named John Ibekwe who married a woman knowing she was HIV positive, became HIV positive himself, and then nearly destroyed himself trying to find the drugs necessary to prevent mother to child transmission. When President Obasanjo called John's wife up to the stage and embraced her on national television, it was the first time an African leader had done that. {APPLAUSE} 

It sent a remarkable message across the continent and across the world that denial is not an option, that people need not lose their jobs and they need not lose their lives if we worked together on this. The Ibekwes had a beautiful daughter, Maria, who was born without HIV infection, and at the end of the recent international conference on AIDS in Barcelona, Spain, President Mandela and I closed the program and I ended my speech by showing little Maria Ibekwe's picture to remind people what this fight against AIDS is all about. {APPLAUSE} You can lead the way, and we should help. I have said before and I will say again, I believe Nigeria and other countries, any country with an AIDS infection rate of over 3 percent, should be eligible for international debt relief if the savings is put in {APPLAUSE} to fighting AIDS. And I am still fighting a relatively lonely battle around the world trying to convince other people I'm right about this.

We should give South Africa debt relief. I know it looks like a rich country. It doesn't look rich if you're in Soweto with all those homeless people with AIDS, it doesn't look rich if you're standing on the border of Zimbabwe seeing thousands of people, a significant number of which have AIDS, pour over every single week. We should give you and every other country with a significant AIDS problem debt relief if the savings is used to put into the health system to stabilize democracy and enable the economy to grow and society to come together. {APPLAUSE} And I hope you will help me with that. We also can't forget the other infectious diseases: TB, malaria, polio--the polio vaccine was discovered about 50 years ago, and yet people continue to die of polio. We can employ the vaccine for the disease and use it in a way that helps to build the public health networks also necessary to combat AIDS. So, I hope then Nigeria will lead, and I will do what I can through my foundation to support you.

Second, you have an opportunity to show how to build a knowledge-based economy not held hostage to the price of oil. Oil gives you advantages to be sure--a guaranteed stream of cash, leverage with countries that have big oil import needs--but oil can be a trap. When the price of oil exploded in the 1970s many of the non-oil enterprises in Nigeria were abandoned, undermining your efforts to diversify the economy. It's important to remember that the wealthiest oil nations are not the wealthiest nations. Japan has the second largest economy of the world and almost no natural resources. They must rely on the talent, the energy, the education of their people, and a sound economic strategy. Even after ten years of real economic difficulty in Japan, its per capita GDP is nearly 3 and a ½ times that of Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil producer. Nigeria needs an economic strategy to build out from oil, not to rely on it. Nigeria needs good governance, trade, internal development, and foreign investment. We need an aggressive campaign to enlighten the world about what is really going on here, about what the opportunities are here, and I believe especially in Europe and the United States. There needs to be an organized attempt to mobilize the Nigerian expatriate community and to help to develop their native lands.

And that brings me to point three. Nigeria can prove that by providing all citizens the education they need, the country's economy can grow, and the society can stabilize. The modern economy rests on what is in people's heads, not what is under their feet. The Africa Union has dubbed the next ten years “the age of capacity building.” Doubtless that age involves the ability of government to function well, the right sort of laws for business to function well, and doubtless it involves the necessary infrastructure. However, the most important capacity of all is the capacity of the mind. How many of you are sitting in this room today in part because you have a better education than other Nigerians your age?

I was only the second person in the history of America who was the governor of a small state to be elected president, and I was the first in my family to graduate from a university. You know, we have a saying in America that those of us in politics want everyone to believe: we were born in a very rural cabin that we built ourselves. We all like to pretend that we're self-made. The truth is, most of us are here by the grace of God and the help of others and by a fair measure of good fortune. If there's one thing I have learned in my travels around the world, it is that intelligence and ability and goodwill are evenly distributed across the planet. Don't you believe that? Don't you think that Nigerians {APPLAUSE} are as smart as people anywhere? I told somebody today, every third Nigerian I meet in America is a doctor. There isn't anything wrong here in Nigeria that can't be fixed by Nigerians if you develop the human capacity of your people. {APPLAUSE}

And again, I think the West should help. There are proven strategies that work. Ninety-eight percent of the children in Brazil are enrolled in school. Why? They actually pay the mothers in the poorest 30 percent of families to send their kids to school. They do the same thing in Mexico. We started a feeding program my last year as President where we offered a good meal to people who would send their kids to school to get the meal. Countries that participated had big increases in enrollment. This is not rocket science. This is not particularly difficult. But it can make all the difference in the world. So, I hope that Nigeria will be the first African country to have a huge increase in the number of its people getting good and relevant education as far as they can go. And I think the West should help.

Fourth, you can prove that self-government works, and here I'd like to talk a little bit as a friend. You know, I know a little bit about conflict in politics. You may have noticed that not everybody in America in the Congress supported me when I was President. I understand this. But I would like to say this: what is the premise of self-government in a democracy, under a Constitution? It is that no one has the whole truth. No one is all-wise. No one is all knowing. No one is immune from the temptations of power. No one. Therefore, we set up a government of laws, not men and women. We set up a government where there are certain rules. We have to empower the government, so that public problems can be solved and public opportunities can be seized. Then we limit that government to avoid abuses, to require honorable compromises and to provide a peaceful means of transition of power. People who follow those rules are instinctively trusted. In America, we had a great model. We have two generals here that identify with this. George Washington was our first President. He won the Revolutionary War. Nobody bothered to run against him. Right after the war, he went home and told somebody else to be President.

He literally had to be dragged back to serve. Then he served two terms and everybody wanted him to run again. He said, no, the country is in good shape. I'm going home. Elect someone else. Then, we had an internal military conflict and he was dragged back again briefly to serve as Commander-in-Chief even though people knew he was old and not able to be in the field every day because he was the symbol of everything we believed in. Not just because he exercised power well, but gently. Even though I can talk about that story from over 200 years ago and be proud of it, I am not proud of everything that happened in the last 200 years. Keep in mind, Thomas Jefferson said we're all created equal, and then we institutionalized slavery. We counted African-Americans in the beginning as only six-tenths of a human being in the census. And democracy says all adults should be able to vote. A hundred years ago, African-Americans couldn't vote except in a few states, and women couldn't vote either.

In my lifetime, we've had the civil rights movement, the women's rights movement, and the expansion of Constitutional protection to other minority groups. We have stumbled time and again over issues of justice and equality, but if you take care of your democracy, what you find is that you keep stumbling in the right direction. No one's life is an uneven march toward a bright light. And no nation's life is either. A big part of this is criticism. One of our founders, Benjamin Franklin, once said our critics are our friends, for they show us our faults. I must say when I was President, there were many days when I thought I had too many such friends. {LAUGHTER} No one in office has failed to feel this way. I used to say politics is the only kind of work in the world where no matter how good a job you're doing, about half the people you work for want to fire you.

There's no good complaining about your problems, half the people don't care, the other half are glad you have those problems. {LAUGHTER} And people, citizens, know that they have a legal right to criticize the President and the national assembly. In America it's a national sport. But I will say this to all the young people who are here: you are not entitled as a citizen to criticize unless you are prepared to take some responsibility {APPLAUSE} for your own country's future. Nobody's right all the time, so criticize all you want but every time you criticize, ask yourself, should I be doing something? What can I do to improve my life, to improve my family, to improve my village, to improve my nation? What can I do? Democratic politics is not a spectator sport. Everybody has to play. And I would say one other thing: I've made a lot of fun today about political conflict. I actually enjoyed most of the fights I had. And I tried to give as good as I got.

But I also tried to remember that the purpose of politics is not seeking and keeping power but using the power for a little while to help the people, to advance their values and their interests, and that requires compromise with your adversaries. Democracy only works if you recognize that you don't have the whole truth. You couldn't possibly be right about everything and therefore, even as you hold fast to your convictions, in the end, the country has to go on. So, some decisions have to be made. And otherwise, politics, even in a democracy, becomes nothing more than a sort of selfish seeking after power or an attempt to get some grievance vindicated or an attempt to get even with someone who beat you once. And I can tell you, I know some people who are like that in America. And every one of them is unhappy because it is not satisfying to spend your whole life trying to climb up a greasy pole that God in time will make you fall off of anyway, sooner or later.

It only works if in the end, you're actually doing something. People say to me all the time, “well, aren't you disappointed that now that your party lost the last presidential election, so many of your polices are being reversed at home?” I say, “well a little bit, but one thing I've learned is, in human affairs, no victory and no defeat is ever final.” It's important for everybody to remember that. No victory, no defeat is ever final. In my case, we've won some as well as lost some in the last year or so. Sometimes my crowd wins. Sometimes we get a good compromise and when we don't like what's happening, we know there's always another election just around the corner. The important thing is to keep moving in the right direction. {APPLAUSE}

The last thing I'd like to say is I--you clapped over this when I said this before--I want to emphasize this: the fifth thing Nigeria can do is to prove you can make all this diversity work. Part of it is having a political system that functions, but it's deeper than that. You clapped when I told you that story of seeing those students embracing each other at the end of the Nigerian civil war. That's the big issue all over the world today. Why did those people kill everybody on September the 11th in America? Because they thought they had the truth. tThey thought their differences were more important than our common humanity. They thought anyone who did not share their truth was a legitimate target. That included over 200 Muslims and a six-year-old child who just wanted to go work with her mother that morning at the World Trade Center. This is the story everywhere—children perish. Actually this has been the story throughout human history. Every since people came out of caves in clans, most of us have defined the meaning of our life in positive terms within our own group and in negative terms with those outside our group. And every one of us in our lives has done that at some time or another.

Well what happens is the more we get involved with other people, the more complicated our relationships get, the smaller the world gets, and the more we realize that the only way to preserve our pride in our race, our tribe, our religion … is to celebrate ours and allow others to celebrate theirs—to say that our differences matter a lot. They make life much more interesting. They make the search for truth possible. But they can only be preserved if we say that as important as our differences are, our common humanity matters more. Nigeria can lead the world in learning that lesson. You have already done some remarkable things with your own human rights violation investigation commission. This kind of thing is really important in healing animosities because people can't let injustices go. Sometimes they have to go unpunished, but not unnoticed. Once they are noticed, some will have to be punished, but some things you just have to forgive and let go. That's one thing I learned from my friend Mandela. I asked him, I said, “when you were taking your last walk for freedom, didn't you hate your oppressors again?” Walking out the last time. He said, “I did for a while, after all. Look, they kept me for 27 years. I didn't get to see my children grow up. I felt hatred and I was afraid. I hadn't been free in so long.” And then he smiled at me and he said, “if I still hated them when I got outside the prison gate, I would still be their prisoner.” {APPLAUSE} He said, “I wanted to be free and so I let it go.”

So, I hope we can do more of that. It is the timeless teaching of all religions that our common humanity matters more. The holy Koran says that Allah put different people on earth not so they might despise one another, but so they might come to know one another and learn from one another. The Torah says that he who turns aside a stranger might as well turn aside from the most high God. My Christian New Testament says that Jesus said, the greatest commandment was to love God with all your heart and the second was, and I quote “like unto it”—to love your neighbor as yourself. {APPLAUSE} In the Dhammapada of the Buddha, he says, “never does hatred by hatred cease. Hatred ceases by love alone.” In the Bhagavad Gita of the Hindus, Lord Krishna says, “him I hold highest who suffers every sorrow of every creature within his own heart.”

All our goals, the goal of defeating poverty, promoting equity, fighting disease, ending conflict, and advancing this nation, start with embracing our common humanity. That is what I hope for Nigeria. And if you will permit me a deeply personal statement, not on behalf of the US government, just me as a human being, that is why I also hope and pray that the legal system will find a way to pardon the young woman who is condemned to death for bearing a child out of wedlock. {APPLAUSE} This pardon is something that you have done once before and I hope it will happen again. Islam from its earliest days sought to protect certain rights for women and to protect children, even as it made divorce easy for men. Mohammed's first wife, after all, was a very successful businesswoman who made an admirable career in her own right.

Surely no civil or religious vision of justice, certainly not the International Declaration of Human Rights can be served by rendering three little children orphans. So I hope and pray that this will happen. I can tell you the world is pulling for Nigeria and if it happens, the world will be cheering for Nigeria. It is a small thing for a great nation to forgive. {APPLAUSE}

If you can come together across all the lines that divide you, if you can give your democracy wings to fly, if we can do more to help you and we must, then Nigeria can lead Africa and indeed the entire planet beyond the sorrow of a world divided into the joys of the global village. We cannot have the future we want unless we share it. Since we have built a world without walls, we have to make it a home for all our children. From time immemorial, the people of this great land have wanted the best for all of their children. I hope you will strive for it. If you do and we help, I believe you will achieve it. Thank you {APPLAUSE} and may God bless Nigeria. 

{/speech}
