{title} Clinton Global Initiative Workshop Summation and Action Plan Plenary {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} September 17, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} Participants:President William J. Clinton, Former President of theUnited StatesDavid Sandalow – Climate Change PanelLael Brainerd – Governance PanelGayle Smith – Poverty PanelRob Malley – Religion Panel {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. I must say, when Mr. Malley was working with me on Middle East peace, all of our team will tell you he lived the words he just spoke. He was a devout Jew, and the Palestinians and their cause of a homeland and a just life and peace for the Israelis never had a better friend. So thank you for your example.
{APPLAUSE}

I would like to now invite Ebrahim Patel, who's just been mentioned, of the Interfaith Youth Corps, and Jack Jenson of the Genesis Foundation up here. {APPLAUSE}

The Interfaith Youth Corps seeks to build a world in which religiously diverse young people interact peacefully and cooperate to serve the common good, strengthening civil society, stabilizing global politics. This is a $100,000 commitment from the Genesis Foundation to strengthen the Interfaith Youth Corps's capacity to build that kind of movement. The gift will underwrite the development of an evaluation paradigm and a plan for the movement, information systems, the addition of key staff, and a substantial expansion of the number of young people who may be able to teach us all more about how to live together. Thank you very much, and bless you.
{APPLAUSE}

I would like to now ask John Marks of Search for Common Ground, and Klaus Peter Wachsmith and Equo Uko of Nestlé to come up. This is a project to create production of two television series, the Station and the Academy to promote reconciliation. It's a commitment by Search for Common Ground, partnered by Nestlé, at a cost of $1.5 million to support two seasons of a dramatic and reality TV series in Nigeria to promote reconciliation and tolerance between religious and ethnic groups, for broadcast by the Nigerian Television Authority.

This is a wonderful thing, and as someone who went to Nigeria and spoke to the Nigerian parliament to plead for the life of a condemned woman under sharia law, I thank you for doing this. God bless you. Thank you so much.
{APPLAUSE}

Now I would like to ask Cheryl and Chaim Subon to come up. And Mr. Peres, why don't you come up too. Shimon, come on up here. {APPLAUSE}

Chaim and Sheryl Subon are giving $1 million to the Peres Center to promote peace and understanding between Israeli and Palestinian children through the arts and education, with an emphasis on the Palestinian children living in Gaza. Thank you very, very much.
{APPLAUSE}

Now I'd like to ask my last surviving chief of staff in the White House, John Podesta of the Center for American Progress, to come up. {APPLAUSE}

I wheedled one more thing out of him. The Center for American Progress has committed to coordinate with anyone else who's here who's interested, as well as other think tanks and experts who are not here, the development over the next couple of months of a concrete proposal for terrorism insurance in Gaza to increase investment there. Thank you very, very much.
{APPLAUSE}

Let me say just a few brief things before we close. First, the window for receiving commitments will be open for another several days, maybe a week or two, because a lot of you came here really interested in what was going on and not knowing what your options were. The commitments that we had on the first day were from people who had been working in these fields a long time and knew exactly what they wished to do. So I urge any of you who haven't made commitments, but who wish to, to do so and we will over the next year maintain a constant presence here where we keep up with people, see if they need some help in keeping their commitments. We'll make regular progress reports and then have a report at the beginning of the Clinton Global Initiative when we start next year.

But just as of right now, just so you'll know what's happened in these remarkable days, right before I came up here we had right at 190 commitments, totaling over $1.25 billion.
{APPLAUSE}

There are a lot of us who – and I count myself in that number – who like goals that are measurable, measurable not just in economic terms but in human terms. There was this dialogue that was held while we were here between the World Bank president Mr. Wolfowitz and Kamal Dervis, the new UNDP administrator, the African Development Bank president Donald Kaberuka, about this. One of the reasons I like Jeffrey Sachs's proposal to adopt a village is you know for $50 a villager you get health, education, agricultural productivity, and for $250,000 or $300,000 a year for five years you can actually lift 5,000 people out of extreme poverty. I like that.

But I think it's also important for us not to minimize the impact of the commitments which may not cost as much but which may have a huge impact over the long run, whether they improve the governance in certain emerging countries, or develop the institutions of civil society, like the Young Arab Leaders, or promote religious reconciliation for positive purposes. I don't think you can minimize that.

One of the things I wanted to mention that I think is very important is the ability to develop systems. It might not cost much money to teach people to do that, but I consider the most important thing my own foundation has done since I left office by a good long stretch, providing anti-retroviral medicine to 175,000 people just since 2003. That's 25 percent of all people in the developing world that have gotten that medicine, and we've done it for probably 10 or 15 percent of what anybody else doing the work has done because Ira Magaziner and his colleagues developed the system that helped to improve the productivity of the drug producers, got them to take a high volume-low margin strategy, work with other governments. That didn't cost a lost of money, but it had a huge impact. So I thank you for that.

We're also going to develop programs which I can't put a dollar value on now because they're only now being mentioned, but I'll tell you about them as we go along. The nicest thing that happened right before I came up was my good friend Carlos Flem from Mexico who has organized any number of amazing initiatives for Latin America, and among other things holds a conference in which he pays for over 10,000 young people a year to come to Mexico City to spend three days discussing problems that have nothing to do with Mexico because he thinks if the children of his country and his region learn to look at the outer world and understand it better, they will clearly be able to solve the problems of their own country.

So he comes up to me today with Shimon Peres and says that if they want him, he will take responsibility for developing a whole communications cell phone network in Gaza and tie it into the Jordanians and all the others that are in the region. So I thank you, Carlos Flem, for that because that's the kind of thing we need to do.
{APPLAUSE}

I just want to say a couple of things about the other proposals, the other areas. First of all, a lot of things were said about climate change today. Vice President Gore was emotional, powerful and persuasive, but he was largely preaching to the saved too. And those of us who weren't saved didn't say much. But our friend Mr. Coomber from Swiss Re, he put $300 million into it. It means he knows something that other people don't. There's money there. There really is profit to be made in cleaning up the environment. Jeffrey Immelt came here to tell us that General Electric, one of the most important companies in the world, believes that cleaning the environment and having a carbon-free future, at least with less carbon, has to be at the core of sustaining the environment.

I can't add anything to that except to say that to all my friends from the Middle
East who are here, and I've been really gratified that we've had a wonderful representation here, if I were living in a country that had $65 oil, I would put my country into the energy business, not just the oil business, and I would finance energy conservation, solar energy, wind energy. I would turn myself into a conglomerate country with a diversified economy and create jobs for the next generation of my people, and I hope that that will happen in the Middle East.
{APPLAUSE}

On the question of faith. I thank the religious leaders who came from outside the Middle East. From Bosnia, for example. And I want to make another acknowledgement. I saw Gerry Adams here somewhere. I think he's still here. But one of the greatest things I thought in the agreement of the IRA to destroy its weapons and to hold it up to international inspection was that they were not only going to have this group that we set up in '98 to validate what the IRA did. They said, we want the destruction of these weapons to be witnessed and verified by representatives of the Catholic Church and the Church of England and Northern Ireland. Because they know that if the religious leaders say it, it will matter.

So I saw David Trimble, who was my partner when we did the Irish peace process, coming here. I don't even know if David is still here or not. So I pulled him off to the side. I said, David, if this is real, will it matter to the people that are just walking around on the street? And he said, absolutely it will make a difference. So religion does not have to be a divisive force.

The second thing I want to say – this is just from my own experience from the time I was a little boy until I became president. Most people I knew who used religion to divide people were not motivated by their allegiance to God but by their desire for power.
{APPLAUSE}

And the same thing is true of race, ethnicity or anything else. I remember when we made the peace in Bosnia and we signed it at the Elysee Palace in Paris. Madeleine's heard me say this a lot of times. I actually sat down across the table and had lunch with Slobodan Milosevic. And he had the coldest eyes I've ever seen, but I'll tell you one thing. He didn't really hate the Bosnian Muslims, or the Croatian Catholics. They were tools in his desire to have absolute power over a greater Serbia. And when these kids are sent with their bodies packed in bombs to blow up other kids, they may believe they're doing Allah's will, but the people who put the bombs on them did it because they think they're going to win a political fight. {APPLAUSE}

And you know, every great religion basically is grounded in two things – the commonness of our humanity and its imperfection. You know, that's why – Wanadizanapata, the Buddha says, you're not fully human unless you feel the arrow piercing another's body as if it were in your own. Or in the Koran Allah – it says, the prophet says in the Koran, Allah put different peoples on the earth not that they might despise one another but they might come to know one another and learn from one another. The Torah says, if you turn aside from a stranger, you might as well turn aside from God. And of course in the Christian New Testament Jesus says, the greatest commandment is to love God with all your heart, but the next is, quote, “like unto it, to love your neighbor as yourself.”

What's the philosophical basis of all this? There's a section in the Christian New Testament which says, and I quote, what faith is. “Faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things unseen.” There's another place where it says, why is love the greatest virtue? Love is a greater virtue even than faith because in this life we see through a glass darkly and know in part.

Very important for us to remember this as we all leave here. Why are we obligated to help other people? Morally. Yes, it's smart. We can all make a lot of money out of climate change. But it would also be nice if our great-grandchildren had air to breathe and water to swim in. We can make a lot of money out of it, but we really have a moral obligation.

In America we need for Africans and people in Southeast Asia and South Asia and Latin America to get rich because we're 4 percent of the world's population, we've got 20 percent of the wealth, and India and China are going like crazy, and if we don't have more partners to trade with, we'll be poor. So yes, it's in our interest. It's also morally right. It's the right thing to do.

Why should somebody be deprived of the right to have a life? I've just been looking into the faces of kids in China and Africa who were destined to die, but they were going to live because we got them AIDS medicine. My little foundation doubled the number of kids in the developing world outside Brazil and Thailand who got medicine this year. That sounds so great. Before you clap, let me tell you how pitiful it is. It's pitiful. We doubled the number of kids outside Brazil and Thailand getting medicine this year. 500,000 children under the age of 12 died last year of AIDS. 25,000 got medicine to stay alive. 15,000 were in Brazil and Thailand. I got 10,000 lousy doses of medicine at a pitiful price of $200 a person. Don't clap. We're going to get 50,000 more next year. That's not good. 70,000 kids get medicine, and 500,000 die. It's terrible. So forget about yes, it will benefit us economically if we do this. But we need a little humility here. If we really have our religious teachings grounded well, we will do this because it's the right thing to do.

The other point I want to make is, one reason that we don't get climate change is we have become arrogant in the present. All of us. Osama bin Laden's arrogant in the present. I mean, he really thinks it matters if he blows us up and kicks a few thousand American soldiers out of Saudi Arabia or whatever. And we really think it matters if we blow him up, more than how we all live and how people will be living 100 years from now.

It was just a few hundred years ago that we had the last little ice age, just 15,000 years that the big ice age moved away and enabled people to move across the earth, and people have been walking around as homo sapiens for 130,000 years. Our forefathers before that, our near-human forefathers were making tools 2 million years ago. So if we had a huge cataclysmic event from global warming, it would just be about 15,000 years from the last one, which is the blink of an eye in the life of the planet or the life of humanity on the planet. We are so arrogant because we are obsessed with the present. So I ask all of you to think about this. I've reached an age now where it doesn't matter whatever happens to me. I just don't want anybody to die before their time any more. And I asked you here because I think that all of us have an unprecedented amount of power to solve problems, save lives and help people see the future. I'm really gratified by what you've done. I hope you'll come next year. I hope you'll make commitments if you haven't. I hope you'll keep them if you made them. And when you leave here, I hope you will feel your own faith strengthened. But I also hope you will leave here with a sense of humility about how much better we could do. And I hope you'll help people all over the world wherever you come from to realize that {COMMENT="Gap in tape"} human history what we're being asked to do is self-evident. Doesn't amount to all that much, but will make all the difference to children yet unborn. Thank you, and God bless you. {APPLAUSE}

I would like to ask all the people who worked on this, all the people who worked on this, give them a big hand. Thank you, Tom Golisano, thank you all of our sponsors. All the volunteers in the back, give them a big hand. They did great. Thank you all. 

{/speech}
