{title} Speech: The Enduring Legacy of Sir Winston Churchill {/title}
{event} Remarks at the Churchill Memorial Concerts, Woodstock, UK, Blenheim Palace {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} March 8, 2003 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. I thank the Duke of Marlborough for his wonderful introduction, and for welcoming us all into this magnificent home. The last time I was here was thirty-three years ago, as a student, a dutiful tourist. I never imagined then I would come back today and have this opportunity. Lady Mary Soames, it's delightful to see you again. I thank you for being here, and for reminding us who were born too late or too far away to have met Winston Churchill that he is not quite lost in the mists of history, and is nearer than we think. I want to also acknowledge the Honourable Nicholas Soames who, like his grandfather and great grandfather, is a child of the House of Commons, and the other members of the Churchill family who are here tonight. I thank the Committee for making this night successful, and I thank our Ambassador Farish and Mrs Farish for being here, and our former Ambassador Phil Lader and his wife Linda who have been my friends for twenty years and who called me and said I ought to show up here tonight for this event. I would like to thank the wonderful organist and the choir – I felt that I was right at home. I thought you had arranged the music for me. The fact that there is a saxophone quartet later-makes me want to talk for three minutes and sit down.

On his very first trip to the United States Sir Winston Churchill said “What an extraordinary people they are; they make you feel at home and at ease in a way I have never before experienced”. I always felt that way when I came to your country. It is difficult to speak in the shadow of Churchill - one always feels slightly inadequate, even if, like me, you've talked for thirty years for a living. When I was President, I gave a few speeches within earshot of the famous Joseph Epstein bust of Sir Winston that was given to the White House in President Johnson's last year in 1968, and even when I thought I had given a pretty good speech I could always swear that bust was shaking its head in mild disapproval. Prime Minister Blair gave another copy of the Epstein bust to President Bush, who actually had the courage to put it in the Oval Office - I could never stand such close scrutiny. {LAUGHTER} 

I have been told that I am the first member of the post-war generation invited to give this lecture. I was only eighteen when Winston Churchill died, but it is perhaps my generation of Americans – indeed, my generation of free citizens everywhere in the world - who owe more to his life and legacy than anyone else. For we grew up in a world that his determination and leadership made possible. When I was in the White House, I often felt that I was living with Winston Churchill hanging round; he spent three weeks with President Roosevelt in the White House during World War II, when travel was not so rapid and people didn't frown on you if you went some place and stayed. {LAUGHTER} I never had anything as important as World War II, and it was unthinkable that I could go any place for three weeks! The White House was full of Churchill stories; how he refused to stay in the Lincoln bedroom because he liked the so-called Queens bedroom better, since he liked to stay in bed late and work, and the light was better there in the morning. How President Roosevelt inadvertently wheeled in on him one day when he was still undressed from his morning bath, and he said, “Come in - I have nothing to hide from the President of the United States”. {LAUGHTER}

I kept a wonderful picture (in my private office) of Sir Winston walking with President Harry Truman to give his famous Iron Curtain speech in Fulton, Missouri and near that, an even more wonderful picture of President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill in a tower looking at the sunset over the Atlas Mountains when they met in Casablanca; Roosevelt was going to hurry home and Churchill said, “You can't go home until you have seen the sunset over the Atlas mountains.” I thought, what a wonderful thing that a man with all the cares in the world took a little time to remember the things that matter in life, no matter what adversity brings. I had a print of Sir Winston in my private office; a wonderful picture with a a mushroom cloud of an atomic bomb in the background, and a gripping quote about the fears he had if the world was not wise enough to manage the nuclear age. I even have a portrait of Sir Winston which is now in my office in Harlem in New York, painted by another amateur painter. I wanted to keep it so much because, like him, my friend who painted it took it up as recreation and painted a marvellous picture.

When the great, recently deceased photographer from Canada, Mr Karsch, came to take the picture of me and my wife, and he gave me his famous portrait - which all the world thought was Churchill contemplating all the gravity before him, and in fact was simply a peeved Prime Minister, because Karsch had jerked the cigar away from him right before he took the picture. {LAUGHTER}

So even though I just sort of rattled around here as a student, I felt by the time I became President that I had some acquaintance with Winston Churchill. Tonight I would like to say in a few moments what his life and legacy mean today in a very different world. Like every public figure of the baby boom generation, I was heavily influenced by his speaking style and leadership qualities. Now, as I write my memoirs, I am trying to learn more about his skill as a writer. He was perhaps the most prolific writer in the English language since Charles Dickens - and Dickens didn't have another day job. It's harder for me; I write everything longhand; I am not sufficiently adept on the computer, and besides I can't think that fast. Sir Winston had a better idea; sometimes he dictated prose from his seat in the bath tub - after all he was First Lord of the Admiralty. {LAUGHTER} But at other times, in the words of his secretary Mrs Hill, his creative process involved Sir Winston “dashing around in shorts and under shirt and a bright red cummerbund, while I trotted behind him from room to room with a pad and pencil struggling to keep pace with the torrential flow of words”. He could dictate four or five thousand words a night, ten thousand on weekends; at that rate my book would be available here in British bookstores next week. {LAUGHTER} I have enjoyed the books of Churchill; on the way over here today I re-read a collection of his journalistic articles published in the early 30's, and republished under the title “Thoughts and Adventures” – it was fascinating. I thought the one thing that people never say about Churchill and his legacy - they say, oh he means this, he means that, he means the other thing – but they don't say he told everyone to think. I read all these little essays and I thought “the man was always thinking”, and defending, by the way, the necessity of changing your position if thinking and circumstance required it. On this trip, I brought, as a cherished memory, the wonderful biography written by my good friend the late Lord Jenkins, whom I miss very much, and to whom all of us “Third Way” politicians owe a very great debt.

In America Churchill remains popular even among people who never read his words or read words about him. Still, Americans have a kind of intuitive idea that they “get” Churchill, that they know what he was about. So across America there are Churchill High Schools and Churchill streets; in New York city alone there is a Churchill restaurant, a Churchill communications firm, even a Churchill luxury stretch limousine service {LAUGHTER} (I see the family solicitors are taking notes). {LAUGHTER} I understand that not all these tributes are welcome news to the Churchill family, but they do reflect the deep hold Churchill has on the American imagination, one which begins with the fact that he had an American mother and an English father. Mark Twain, in introducing him, once said it was a blend that makes the perfect man. Even with his healthy ego, I doubt that Sir Winston would have asserted his perfection; after all, he drank his whisky, he had his foibles, even (dare I say it) made a mistake or two along the way.

Americans have an affinity for Churchill that is deep, not because of perfection but because of the lasting power of his words, his ideals, his leadership and his spirit. The words powerfully spoken, written with clarity and conviction; the ideals of human progress and the pursuit of happiness, the leadership in war and peace against Nazism and Communism before the United Nations, the spirit to rally the English people at the edge of destruction to their finest hour in the seventh decade of his life, a life whose setbacks would have broken a lesser man. I thought today that Churchill must have viewed a lot of his adversity in life in much the terms that Mark Twain (who admired him so much) said, when he noted that it does a dog good to have a few fleas; it keeps him from worrying so much about being a dog. {LAUGHTER}

Churchill looms so large it is tempting to find in his life and labours easy analogies, easy answers to the new and vexing problems we face today. As a first-rate reporter and historian, Churchill would caution us (as his grandson has in the last several months) to proceed down this road with caution; to look at the past history and the peculiar facts of our present situation; to apply the lessons of history with the understanding that exact parallels rarely exist, because human flaws and failures vary too much for that. That said, Churchill did inspire us with insights that are clearly relevant today. First, there is the powerful truth he articulated more and more clearly after the war. In 1950 he told the House of Commons, “the whole movement of the world is towards an inter-dependence of nations. We feel all around us the belief that it is our best hope”. As in his early warning against Hitler, again Churchill was ahead of his time. What he saw the inklings of in 1950 and described with optimism and certainty, would not be true for much of the world until the Cold War was over, the Berlin Wall had come down, and barriers of so many kinds had begun to crumble along towards the end of the 20th Century.

People have now come to rely on the term globalization to describe the present conditions, but I prefer Churchill's term, inter-dependence, because it more clearly captures the non-economic meaning of our relations with other people on this planet: the incredible connections wrought by information technology, travel and immigration, shared scientific endeavours, shared security and shared vulnerability. Simply put, inter-dependence means that for good or ill we cannot escape each other.

September 11th 2001 showed us that a world that is inter-dependent but not yet an integrated community can be perilous indeed. In the United States 3100 people from seventy countries, including over 200 citizens of this great nation, were killed by people who use the forces of inter-dependence; they used open borders, easy travel, easy immigration, easy access to information and technology. So if Sir Winston were here with us tonight in body as well as in spirit, I believe he would tell us the great business of the 21st century is to build a world of positive inter-dependence, a world of shared benefits, shared responsibilities, shared community, shared values, shared security and freedom. And I believe he would say that the vaunted, special relationship he and Roosevelt did so much to build, and that many of us who followed him worked hard to strengthen, is essential to building that kind of world.

I believe it is a mistake to attribute Churchill's special relationship either to sheer pragmatism, created only for the sake of defeating Hitler and containing the Soviet Union, or to gauzy sentiment based merely on shared language and culture, and his enormous admiration for President Roosevelt. It was far more than that, as Churchill made clear. Yes, the relationship between the United States and Britain was special in its own right, but for Churchill it had to be viewed in the context of the expanding family of nations. In that famous speech in Fulton, Missouri, the Iron Curtain warning has received all the attention; but one of the ideas of that speech, soon to be expanded in the Zurich speech, was that not only did the United States and Britain have to stick together, but Europe had to come together, and all the while “our constant aim must be to build and fortify the strength of the United Nations organisation”.

So he saw our special relationship as a part of a web of special relationships; he did not see these three goals-the Atlantic alliance, a united Europe, a strong UN-as contradictory; just the opposite. He felt the only way the UN would survive was through strong partnerships among its members. This, as many of you will recall, is what he said in 1963 when President Kennedy made him an honorary citizen of the United States. In a note that his son Randolph read aloud at the White House, Churchill wrote “Our partnership does not have any exclusive nature; the Atlantic community is a dream that can well be fulfilled to the detriment of none and to the enduring benefit and honour of great democracies”.

When I was President I tried to take Mr Churchill's advice to heart, supporting the establishment of the World Trade Organisation; expanding NATO to include former communist countries; establishing new forms of co-operation with the Asian Pacific countries; committing to a free trade area of the Americas, supporting the Kyoto accord on climate change, the International Criminal Court, the comprehensive test ban treaty, and a stronger and larger European Union, which I hope will grow stronger and larger, even though it will be bigger and richer than the United States. We worked for peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland, Bosnia, Kosovo, the Middle East, the Indian sub-continent, in African conflicts, between North and South Korea; we worked for a united front to contain, reduce and destroy weapons of mass destruction, to fight terror, to reduce the sources of global misery - poverty, ignorance, disease, environmental destruction.

The US and the UK have such economic, military and political power and set such a powerful example as prosperous, free, multi-religious, multi-racial democracies, that the present moment imposes upon us a responsibility, as heavy as at any time in the past, to build the kind of world of which Mr Churchill dreamed. Sixty years ago, in 1943, in a speech at Harvard, he famously said that, “the price of greatness is responsibility. One cannot rise to be in many ways the leading community in the civilised world without being involved in its problems, without being convulsed by its agonies and inspired by its causes”. The agonies and causes of the world are different today, but our responsibility remains; in both our nations and in the watching world there is today a very great debate about what exactly our responsibilities require of us. In 1943 the responsibilities of Churchill and Roosevelt were massive but fairly straightforward - crush Hitler, liberate France, win the war in the Pacific. In a couple of years they were equally clear - re-build Europe, contain Communism. Today the threats we face are more varied, and in their variety may seem more resistant to change, but our responsibilities are clear enough. Fight terror. Contain, reduce and destroy weapons of mass destruction. Reverse climate change. Reduce poverty in a world where half the world's people still live on less than two dollars a day, a billion people will go to bed hungry tonight, and a billion and a half will never have a clean glass of water. Put the 130 million children who never go to school, in school. Combat AIDS, TB, Malaria, and infections related to diarrhoea; these four will cause one in four of all the deaths on earth this year. Resolve the great religious and racial conflicts. Strengthen the power and reach of the United Nations and other international organisations, and make the dominant idea of the 21st century a simple one-that our common humanity is more important than our interesting differences.

I have no idea exactly what Sir Winston would say about the particular problems before us, but I imagine he would say think, think, think; and try to fashion solutions consistent with the over-riding goal: to build a world of positive inter-dependence. In combating poverty, disease and ignorance, I think he would say they are the breeding grounds of terror and war and discontent. We know how to reduce poverty, fight AIDS and get children in school, and doing it all is far, far cheaper than cleaning up the mess not doing so will bring, so spend the money. About North Korea I think he would say something like this: “It is a small, isolated nation, unique in its inability to feed itself and in its stunning capacity to build bombs and missiles. It does not wish to use them, but left to its own devices it will have to sell them, for food and energy and prestige. Its real objectives are, number one, not to follow East Germany into oblivion, number two, to be accepted by its neighbours, number three, to be dealt with by the United States and other great powers. So offer them a final deal. If they'll end their nuclear and missile programs, and subject that to testing, we will give them food and energy; more important, we will show them how to grow food and make things. We will give them an non-aggression pact – because we'll never be aggressive unless they do something to violate the pact. But don't give up the option of taking out the nuclear facilities.

On Iraq I hesitate to say much; so much has been said, and I have been around long enough to know it is easier to talk when you no longer have any responsibility. But I think he would remind us that Saddam Hussein is a ruthless tyrant who has governed by murder and intimidation, and the Iraqi people would be better off without him. He has ignored the United Nation's call to disarm the past twelve years. I think that he would remind us that the inspections, however, have worked (when they were in place) in destroying more weapons of mass destruction than were destroyed in the Gulf War; that the sanctions have worked, in the sense that his military has now less than one half of the capacity it had during the Gulf War. I think he would say our objective should be to disarm Iraq, because even though he is not about to use or give these things away while the inspectors are there and the world is watching, given the nature of that regime, it is hard to believe that you could have that volume of chemical and biological stocks around for ever without any of it ever falling into the wrong hands, and just a little VX or Aflatoxin, just a little anthrax or ricin can kill a lot of people, shatter confidence, crush economies. So our objective should be to disarm Iraq, if possible to do it in a way that strengthens the United Nations and keeps the United States' European alliance strong. Today it seems that that is impossible. France and Germany can be accused of minimising the dangers of disarming Iraq. America has been criticised for minimising the importance of working through the UN and maintaining the Alliance. Is there a response?

I am sort of with Prime Minister Blair on this; he has tried to have three objectives - to maintain the Alliance, strengthen the UN and disarm Iraq. So I would like to see them get a final schedule; they are disarming the missiles now, and it would seem a little unseemly for us to attack them after we made them even weaker in defending themselves than they were before; but the missiles go 120 miles instead of 90 - the North Koreans make missiles that reach the United States. The real issue is the chemical and the biological stocks that are there. So I think there ought to be a reasonable timetable; finish the missiles, do the chemical, and the biological work. If our European friends are serious about disarming Iraq, and if our American friends are serious about trying to preserve the unity of the United Nations and the relationships with the Alliance, we can wait a bit. The military issue is not in question; we are stronger militarily than we were in ‘91 and they are weaker, much weaker. The question is, can we find a way to do this? And if Saddam disarms under the United Nations resolution, then we have to be prepared to work for regime change in ways short of invasion. But I would say, and I think Mr Churchill would say, don't give up the force option; because there is a lot of chemical and biological material there. You can always kill someone tomorrow or next week or next month; we can't bring them back to life; we can try one more time to get a schedule for disarmament.

On Al Qaeda and Afghanistan I think he would just say, please don't make the mistake that the world made in the 1980's and walk away from Afghanistan and leave it to become, in ten or fifteen years, another terrible problem where women are abused, where huge amounts of opium are grown and where the next generation's Bin Laden flourishes. On the Middle East, I think he would tell us to get on about the business of making peace. They will have to share the land, the economy, the security, and respect for their holy sites, and so much damage has been done these last two years that the United States and Europe, will have to guarantee any agreement that is made, and if so we ought to do it.

Will an inter-dependent global community come to pass? Yes it will, because we have no other choice. At worst, the lack of it is deadly and terrifying; at best, it is confining and insecure. It will come-we have no other choice. Will we make mistakes along the way in trying to build it? Doubtless we will. Will we disagree about exactly how we ought to go about building? I certainly hope so, since we are doing something that has never been done before, and nobody has a corner on truth and wisdom. I hope we will disagree. And Churchill would be the first to say, stand up and express your opinions. Think, think, think, and speak. The most important thing is that we have a common goal, rooted in shared values. At that speech sixty years ago, Sir Winston told the Harvard students-you cannot stop; we have now reached the stage in the journey where there can be no pause-we must go on. It must be world anarchy or world order.

I would like to close with this personal note. Like Churchill I have known a fair amount of political and personal adversity. More of mine than his was self-inflicted, but I drew no small inspiration from his unbending will to go on. So I close with these words: for the United States and the United Kingdom our political creed in the new century might be found in paraphrasing his shortest and one of his grandest speeches. Never give in; never, never, never, never; never give in in matters great or small, except to convictions of honour and good sense. But never forget, you share the whole world with neighbours great and small. They too have their dreams and nightmares; you must make them yours. So never give in, but never withdraw the outstretched hand. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
