{title} Summation and Closing Address of the Clinton Global Initiative {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} September 22, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

I would like to invite to the stage first Gareth Evans, the President of the International Crisis Group, Dr. Hamza Al Kholi, the Chairman and CEO of the Al-Kholi Group, and anyone else who wishes to come up here, involved with the partners here, the International Crisis Group, the Al-Kholi Foundation, Iara Lee and George Gund III Foundation, and the Radcliffe Foundation, which I know my good friend, Frank Giustra, is behind. I want to thank them for this commitment, worth $900,000 over three years.

The International Crisis Group, with top level international figures, will work to build a just and lasting peace in the Middle East by fomenting the broad political support needed to build this peace. They already convened a brainstorming session at the UN earlier this month, and they plan to convene a high level group of former American government officials to generate bipartisan support for Middle East peace efforts and produce a series of reports and briefings on the conflict to be presented to policy makers.

After the troubles in Lebanon, the frustrations after the recent elections, all the ups and downs in the last two years, all of us who have ever dealt with this know that there will be no ultimate security for Israel until this is resolved, and that other wealthier people will play games with the poor and often brutalize Palestinians until this is resolved. We all know, more or less, what the resolution will be. I have never dealt in my life with something -- it's like doing a math problem where everybody knows the answer and no one will give you a pencil to solve the problem. {APPLAUSE} So, this is a good thing that these two good people are doing. Thank you, Hamza. Thank you, Gareth. It's great to see you both. Please sign. Thank you. {APPLAUSE}

Now I'd like to invite John Marks, the President of Search for Common Ground, Kamran Elahian, philanthropist and entrepreneur, Deborah Berger, president of Unbound Philanthropy, and anyone else who's supposed to be up here with them.

The organizations involved in this project are Search for Common Ground, the Alan B. Slifka Foundation, Kamran Elahian and Unbound Philanthropy. They have made a commitment to communicate to millions of people the ideas and values of coexistence, mutual understanding, and reconciliation. This idea came out of one of the religious and ethnic conflict working sessions on Thursday, where the idea was proposed and the money pledged to bring together a number of world-renowned, influential people to create a series of public service announcements to promote tolerance and reconciliation worldwide. Archbishop Tutu and Cicely Tyson, both of whom have participated, obviously, in this year's CGI, will be among those featured, alongside musicians, athletes, and other well known figures. So I thank them for doing this.

In the Democratic Republic of Congo, studies have shown that Search for Common Ground's works are one of the critical sources of public awareness of the peace process, and has helped to reduce suspicion and rumors that can lead to violence. So let's give them a big thanks and wish them well. {APPLAUSE}

{OTHER-SPEAK} Good morning. I just wanted to say that we felt so many amazing moments in here. And I'm sure you had a lot of those moments that not only got you emotional, not only brought tears in your eyes when you heard, for example, Archbishop Desmond Tutu -- what a wonderful message he had. We believe that those kinds of messages, with the cooperation from CGI, need to be heard by many people in different parts of the world, and if you could get some clips and snippets from that, why not provide it as PSA to a number of different cultures and countries? {APPLAUSE} {/OTHER-SPEAK}

Thank you. John just told me that all of you should consider yourselves potential interviewees for this project. {APPLAUSE} Now, I would like to invite 2006 Olympic gold medalist Joey Cheek, founder of the Where Will We Be campaign, to come up here. This is a fascinating commitment. Come on up. {APPLAUSE}

This commitment is to unite a majority of 2008 Olympians to speak with one voice, to apply political pressure, and build partnerships with NGOs to help end the crisis in Darfur by the Summer Olympics onset in 2008. {APPLAUSE} And the proposal is to assemble a core group of elite international athletes to travel to Sudan and film a documentary of their experiences on the ground to raise media attention, develop as a source of recruiting for more athletes, localize the message, lead a public relations campaign, and hold international screenings of the film. Each athlete will return to his or her home country and share the experience with the media, call upon others to join, to work to unite a majority of 2008 Olympians to speak with one voice, to apply political pressure, to build these kinds of partnerships with NGOs so that the crisis can be ended by the Summer Olympics of 2008.

Let me also say that, as he might say, the Olympians will reach, collectively, an audience of almost four billion people worldwide because of the fascination with the Olympics. And we know that one of the problems the United Nations is having is that individual governments don't want to commit to expand the African Union for us or to replace it, or to fund an expansion or replacement in the absence of the approval of the Sudanese government. The athletes bringing this kind of public attention, given their importance in countries all over the world, could help to change many, many governments' policies, perhaps a lot more than my endless round of private meetings have been able to do so far. So I am profoundly grateful, and I thank you, Joey, for doing this. Let's give him a big hand. {APPLAUSE}

Ladies and gentlemen, we're almost done now. Each one of these commitments highlights a great source of promise, but also reminds us that the whole reason we're here is that we live in an interdependent world that's been good to us, but is fundamentally unstable, unequal, and unsustainable. And a lot of our commitments illustrate that.

One in particular that deals with sustainability, because it caught my eye, is the Global Partnership for Afghanistan, a very old nation with a very rich history, which has been torn to smithereens by conflicts since the Soviet invasion nearly 30 years ago. Now, its moderate Muslim democracy is once again threatened by a resurgent Taliban in the south and an explosion of poppy-growing, which increased 60 percent last year and now produces 92 percent of the world's poppies for opium and heroin.

The Global Partnership is the essence of what CGI is all about. They said, “We want to do something specific about it.” They proposed to partner with local farmers to launch a hundred commercially viable orchard and wood lot businesses, each projected to generate an income sufficient to support a family of eight now living in poverty, with a rate of return on the endeavor higher than the same people could earn by cultivating poppies. It's a huge deal. It gives Afghanistan a better chance, and it means less opium and less heroin on the streets of cities all over the world.

Now, keep in mind, this is also a model which is infinitely expandable. So if any of you haven't made a commitment yet, here's something you can invest in that you know is going to work if it happens, because the criteria says that the return has to be greater than they would earn growing poppies on the same amount of land. So thank you very much for that. {APPLAUSE}

Almost every commitment in some way or another seeks to reduce the impact of inequality, which we know is staggering, across the globe and even within developing countries. Half the world's people still live on less than two dollars a day. Chelsea told me this morning that Fortune had just published its annual list of the 100 richest Americans, and for the first time, they're all billionaires. The poorest one is worth a paltry two billion. And yet, poverty among working people has gone up in this country. So this inequality is a problem that is getting worse and will eventually challenge existing democracies and coherent societies, as well as serve as enormous barriers to human relations in emerging economies. A lot of our commitments deal with that.

I want to mention one. The Sunam Quraishi Foundation partnered with the renowned children's rights activist, Craig Kielburger, and his organization, Free the Children, to adopt a village in the Masai Mara of Kenya. They're going to provide several new schools and essential community services, including clean water. And I mention this because they're able to help a thousand children and adults for the relatively modest sum of $68,000. Again, this is a replicable model. So if you care about inequality and you don't have a fortune to spend, but you'd like to do something to change the reality of people's lives on the ground, this is an example.

And Kenya, it's very important, because when the new administration came in Kenya, they said one of the dumbest things that happens in poor countries all over the world, and one of the reasons we wound up with so many kids and radical madrassas in Pakistan, is that poor countries can't afford to fund their education system, so they charge the families of the poorest kids to send their kids to school in country after country. They abolished those fees in Kenya. Guess what? In 30 days, another million kids showed up. Within six months, two million more children had shown up for the schools. But they didn't have schools, they didn't have teachers, they didn't have materials. They never dreamed it would be that explosive. So here is something you can do at an affordable price, to have a direct and tangible impact on inequality.

The current world is unsustainable because of two things we've discussed: the imminent threat of climate change and the persistence of religious, racial, and ethnic divides. What Richard Branson did here is truly wonderful. But you don't have to have $3 billion to commit over ten years to replicate it. It will get a lot of press because of the staggering dollar amount and because he is brilliant and charismatic. But the ultimate lesson is: How did he get this money in the first place? Because he understands how this system works. The most important thing Richard Branson has done is to remind us that, yes, we need government changes. Yes, we need rule changes. But for those of us who aren't in and can't make those changes, except to vote for different policies when we get the chance in our respective countries, there is today a staggering set of economic opportunities that will yield good return on investment -- to reduce the threat of global warming, create new jobs, start new businesses, promote greater equality, as well as a sustainable environment. That is the real lesson of the Branson commitment, and all of us can participate in that going forward. {APPLAUSE}

Finally, in the continuing fight against religious, racial, and ethnic hatreds and the violence and terror which often accompany them, we have to remember the stunning impact on all of us of Bishop Tutu -- his personal example, his unifying words, his reconciling spirit. Not all of us can be him, but all of us can support him and people like him. He's too good a man to mention it, and he never even asked to be considered here, but he has established a foundation for peace that will enable him to continue his work, now that he has no organized clerical responsibilities or any responsibilities within the South African government. He's got to raise a few million dollars to fund it. Hillary and I are going to support him personally. If you want to do something in the area of reconciliation, where you can amplify your words in a huge echo chamber, even a modest contribution can help Bishop Tutu to put his stake in the ground and to give that speech. I will never forget as long as I live that religion is like a knife: if you slice a loaf of bread, it's good; if you slice somebody's hand off, it's bad. I will never forget that.

The reason that we started this whole thing is that the world is unequal, unstable, and unsustainable; that governments alone can't move us from inequality to equal opportunity, from instability to shared responsibility, from unsustainability to integrated communities where we live in harmony with nature and each other; and that all of us can do it. All we tried to do here is to create a small piece of common ground in a highly contentious world; common ground, where people like Laura Bush and Bill Clinton; Rupert Murdoch and Barbra Streisand; Muslims, Jews, and Christians; a conservative Latin American president like Alvaro Uribe and a populist one like Evo Morales; the great winners of the 21st century, the Gateses, the Buffetts, the Scotts, Carlos Slim, Bob Johnson, Richard Branson; and those who represent the poor, the sick, the unlettered -- where they can all stand together and make common cause, where we can state our differences directly and respectfully, clarify our thoughts, and maybe most important of all, leave our useless resentments behind, so we can learn from each other and lift our vision to a better place.

It seems to me that's what this interdependent world demands of us: a relentless quest for new communities of equal opportunity, shared responsibility, and genuine belonging. Cynics may say we are latter-day Don Quixotes and Sancho Panzas. I say, if you will build me another windmill, I'll be glad to tilt at it. And the world will be a safer place. All I know is that every time I go somewhere, I see all over again, like I did in that little building that was one of the few with electricity in Liberia, that intelligence, ability, and dreams are evenly distributed.

And I know something else, having lived a long time now. Every denial of our common humanity, from a terrorist tragedy to the daily miseries of life, leads to heartache. And every affirmation of it brings some measure of joy and peace.

So I'm really grateful to the people we celebrated here. People like my friend Wangari Maathai, who rose against all the odds on the strength of her spirit, and whose book about it will move you to tears. But I'm also grateful to people you and I will never know who do the same thing every day. Otherwise, the wars would be longer, the deaths would be greater, and we wouldn't even come here.

I took Bill and Melinda Gates to Lesotho with me, and we looked at this attempt we're putting together to have a national testing campaign, to get everybody over 12 to be tested for HIV and AIDS by promising no discrimination and absolute access to medical care and medicine when they need it. To do this, since you have the right to opt out, we had to find partners who would go into every little village and be good models. We had one guy who was a national boxing coach. He still had a great, though very frail body. His CD4 count got down to 4 and was now 750, and he's alive because of our program.

But the most moving person was a young girl who had been raped and infected, in a traditional society where she could have been stigmatized and broken forever. We're not talking about the streets of New York here. Here's a woman high in a village in Lesotho, going in and looking into the faces of her countrymen and women, saying, “I'm HIV-positive. Do you know how I got it? I was raped. Am I ashamed? No. Was this my fault? No. Am I going to be a victim? No. And neither should you. But you shouldn't infect anybody, either. Now, if I can stand up here and tell you that I'm HIV positive because I'm a rape victim, the least you can do is to be tested and find out if you are, and then do the right thing.” Now, she'll never be a millionaire, and she'll never be a movie star, but she may save lives beyond what all of us will do. There are people like them everywhere. And they deserve our support.

When I went to Nelson Mandela's 88th birthday party recently in South Africa, I was supposed to show up at a hospital event with him. He sent me over a shirt to wear that had his prison number on it, 46664. So I showed up with Mandela's prison shirt. He's a lot better performer than I'll ever be. He knew that was a good thing to do. But it reminded me of something he said, and I want to read it to you: “To be free is not merely to cast off one's chains, but to live in a way that respects and enhances the freedom of others.”

That's what CGI is all about. That's why you're here. That's what we're trying to do. Madiba spent a third of his life behind steel bars. Today, three billion people are trapped behind the bars of poverty, lack of health care, war, terror, environmental devastation, and the imminent specter of global warming. To live in a way that respects and enhances the freedom of others requires that we break through those bars and cast off each other's chains.

Bishop Tutu reminded us that the essential wisdom of Africa about the human condition is captured in the word ubuntu. He didn't give you the literal translation because it is almost mystical. The literal translation of ubuntu, in English, is, “I am because you are.” Now, when we finished sequencing the human genome, we discovered the astonishing fact that, genetically, every breathing human being on the planet is more than 99.9 percent the same. The further astonishing fact is that if you took clustered pure ethnic groups -- we have the President of Iceland and the First Lady here -- if you took, let's say, 100 Icelanders who had never lived anywhere else, they were 100 percent
Icelanders as far back as we could trace, and you put them with 100 Bolivian Indians, who had always had intermarriage, and you took any tribe in Africa and you found some Sikhs who had always intermarried -- so there are no ethnic differences as far as we know -- if you put all of these groups together, the genetic differences among individuals within each group would be greater than the differences in the genetic profile in the groups from one another. Now, that's stunning, right?

Think about this, every one of us. It's easy for us to point the finger and say we wish the Venezuelan President wouldn't say hateful things. We hope the Iranian president will moderate. We wish the Israelis and Hamas would make peace. You think about how much of your life, your own life, is organized around that one-tenth of one percent. You had better grades than somebody else. You're better looking than somebody else. We're arrogant enough to think that those of us who have a lot of money are so much better than that poor girl who's in that village in Lesotho, trying to get people to get tested for AIDS.

Now, think about it. All of us organize more than 90 percent of our lives, our thoughts, our energies, our self image -- we all do it -- around that one-tenth of one percent -- even the most liberal, social minded, giving, unselfish. We always think about, what is it? Barbra got the voice of a generation out of one-tenth of one percent of her genetic pool. All of us do that. We have lived our whole lives that way.

So we come here for a couple of days to remember ubuntu. If we were alone on this planet, alone, and we were the most beautiful, the most brilliant, the most powerful, the most wealthy, and the longest-lived person ever to exist, if we were alone, we would not amount to a hill of beans. And if we did, nobody would know it.

So, ubuntu. For us, it means the world is too small, our wisdom too limited, our time here too short to waste any more of it winning fleeting victories at other people's expense. We have to find a way to triumph together. And so you have here. Thank you. {APPLAUSE}

{OTHER-SPEAK} Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for attending the 2006 Clinton Global Initiative Conference. Please travel safely. We'll look forward to seeing you next year. Thank you. {/OTHER-SPEAK} 

{/speech}
