{title} Remarks at the American Friends of Rabin Medical Center Dinner {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} October 27, 2002 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. You know, when you're not President anymore, you always wonder what you're going to do with your time. I'm here to play backup for Larry King and Ehud Barak. Ladies and gentlemen, I'm honored to be here tonight and grateful for the words of my friend Ehud Barak. A lot of nice things have been said about me, but I will say what I always said when the Irish said such things or the people of Sarajevo or Kosovo or Eritrea and Ethiopia or Haiti: it was America's job to help make peace, but the burdens fell on those who led their nations. If all it took in the world was the courage of one man to have peace in the Middle East, because of Ehud Barak, we would have peace in the Middle East today. {APPLAUSE} He cared not for the cost in personal turmoil or political popularity. But he did not waste his time. He was simply ahead of his time. Someday peace will come to Israel and when it does, it will be along the pathway marked out by Yitzbah Rabin and Ehud Barak.

Prime Minister Barak and I were together at the Waldorf when I made my last speech as President on the Middle East, but it's better tonight. First of all, there are no consequences to what either one of us says. And secondly, Larry King showed up. I am delighted that he's willing to do audiences of less than 15 million, and I'm glad to be one of them. We all have our arguments with people in the press, those of us in politics. But I'll say one thing. Throughout his entire career, Larry King has always given the rest of us our say, and he's tried to help all of us be better citizens by giving all different kinds of people their say. Thank you. I want to thank Nava Barak for being here, for her leadership in this cause and for her friendship to Hillary and me. Ehud and I used to laugh that among the many things we had in common was that we were both badly over-married. I'm proud of you Nava. I thank you. I wish Hillary could be here. But the election is in ten days and as Larry said, one of us has to work.

I want to congratulate my friend Alan Patricof. He and Susan have been wonderful friends to Hillary and me for a good while now. I remember the first time Alan and I went jogging in Central Park. I think he thought my prospects of becoming President were limited but somewhat better than ever finishing the New York Marathon. In early 1992, when I was dropping like a rock in the polls and the election was ten days away in New Hampshire, he led a fundraiser for me here in New York. I expected to walk into an empty room, but when 700 people were there, I said, “well, I'm not dead yet.” And it turned out, I wasn't, thanks in no small measure to the fact that Alan And Susan never gave up. They are great people and I thank you for honoring Alan. I want to thank Robert Ivanhoe and Mort Zuckerman. I also want to thank the others who organized this event, and all those here from the Rabin Medical Center who take care of the victims of terror and who care for other patients, and those at the Center who do research.

Tonight, I want to give a relatively brief speech in hopes that those of you who love baseball will get home before the World Series is over. I was hoping you wouldn't clap when I said that. I realize what time I'm getting up to speak, and it reminds me that the first speech I ever gave as an elected official was almost 26 years ago in January of 1977. I was a 30-year-old Attorney General from my state. I went to a Rotary Club installation banquet. It began at 6:30. 500 people were there. 497 of them were introduced. I got up to speak at a quarter to 10. The only person in the audience more nervous than me was the poor sucker who had to introduce me. So he got up there and the first words out of his mouth were, “you know, we could have stopped here and had a very nice evening.” I knew what he meant. He meant something better was coming, but that's not the way it came out. So, I'm well aware that we could have stopped before I got up and had a very nice evening.

I want to talk just a few minutes and I hope it gives you one or two things to think about—about the work of making peace, of the healing efforts of this medical center, of Mr. Oppenheim and Mr. Cohen and others, and of the diplomatic efforts of Ambassador Ayalon.

Ambassador Increy: the political efforts that Ehud and I made for a frustrating cause are so important. This medical center was named for Yitzhah Rabin. Every November when the anniversary of his death comes around, I feel physical pain again. It's hard for me to explain to those of you who were not part of those days how much those of us in the White House who worked with Prime Minister Rabin loved him. If I had taken a poll on the day he was shot, half the people who work with me on the Middle East would have taken the bullet for him because they were afraid it would kill the peace process.

It's hard for me to explain to you how happy we were when Ehud won the Prime Ministership (even though I had a good relationship with Prime Minister Netanyahu). We did the agreement at the Wye River, which bought us two and a half years of peace. But we knew that Ehud had explicitly committed to finish the peace process. When you look around the world it is striking to see how many people are willing to take enormous personal risks to inflict pain on other people and how few are willing to take similar risks to make peace. You can name them: Rabin, Barak, Mandela, the Irish leaders, Pastrana in Columbia, who went alone into the jungles to face the terrorists and the narco-traffickers, and a few others. Somehow we need to make this kind of courage more abundant. For in an interdependent world, the only final victories come not from beating someone in battle, but from making peace.

When Anwar Sadat came to Jerusalem to speak to the Knesset, he said these words: “There is no happiness based on the detriment of others.” Now, nearly everyone would say they believe that. If I called you all tonight in an anonymous telephone poll the way we endlessly do in America in election season and I said, “do you agree or disagree with this statement,” the agreement factor would be ninety percent. Yet nearly no one is willing to act on it when the chips are down. Too many of us still think we can win by making our neighbors lose. Too many people in wealthy countries like ours continue to demand for ourselves what we deny to others.

In recent years, there has been a whole spate of utterly fascinating books exploring the conflicting human impulses to cooperate on the one hand and to have conflict on the other. They've been written by students of primitive, isolated societies in the rain forests or the Savannah in Africa, probing whether there's something that goes back as old as human society that causes us to fight with one another. They've been written by students studying chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorillas—students who are searching for something about even our pre-human ancestors that makes us do this. There have been those who have studied the behavior of birds and bats to see if they could learn anything about why we both fight and cooperate with one another. There have also been books about the most cooperative of all of the earth's species—ants, termites, and bees. Marvelously successful, numbering in the billions, they're utterly useless on their own and only successful when they cooperate. Economists have weighed in on this subject, calling people who fight others or take advantage of them for short term benefit without regard to their long term consequences “rational fools.” Psychologists and psychiatrists have written books about the impulse to cooperate and the impulse to fight. Theologians have speculated about it as well. Every major religion has some powerful statement about our common humanity.

The most interesting, enlightening book on this that I've read lately is a book by Matt Ridley called “The Origins of Virtue.” The most hopeful books I've read were written by Robert Wright: “The Moral Animal” and “Non-Zero.” He simply argues that the more interdependent we are, the more we have to figure out how to get along. The most practical book I've read is the Harvard Sociologist Robert Putnam's book about why Northern Italy works better than Southern Italy. He says it's because of “rules, networks, trust,” and what he calls “social capital.”

But what has never been resolved, if you read all the books by the scientists, the anthropologists, the psychologists, the sociologists, the economists, and the theologians, is whether we are driven by a selfish gene toward conflict or by a truly smart selfish gene toward cooperation. Whether we are evolving toward cooperation genetically or simply figuring it out in developing a different culture, whether the human psychology is such that in the end, we'll never trust each other enough to do what needs to be done. If you read all the literature, the truth is nobody can be sure. But I do know one thing from eight years of observing bloodshed and harmony in the Middle East and elsewhere: when people live in a highly interdependent environment, (and the Middle East is highly interdependent), the Palestinians blow up a bunch of Israeli kids at a discotheque or a pizza parlor, the Israelis close the border and the Palestinians go without jobs. When people are in an interdependent environment, whether in nations, in regions, or increasingly across the whole globe as we learned on September 11th, we have to find a way to build an integrated community of shared values and benefits and responsibilities, or be consigned to endless cycles of tit for tat. You treat me right, I'll treat you right. You do something wrong and I'll hurt you. If the world is nothing but tit for tat, then at the very best, our life is constantly anxious, insecure, and confined. And at the very worst, it is full of misery, destruction, and death.

When I saw that brave Israeli Sergeant up here reminding us of what she had endured, I thought that the world's current troubles are all the more frustrating against the background of its current possibilities. Think of the medical center. The development of the human genome and the practical applications of super micro technology, called nano-technology, really raise the prospect of both the prevention and the cure of all kinds of cancers and Alzheimer's and Parkinson's and lots of other diseases. The development of science and technology is going to tell us what's in those dark holes in outer space and the deepest regions of the oceans. Advancements in energy technology are going to enable us to meet the challenge of climate change without economic demise and, I hope, solve the water shortages in the Middle East and elsewhere. Wealth and our increasing creative knowledge means that if we're smart, we can work with people in poorer countries to end poverty, ignorance, and disease.

What is needed is a vision of an integrated community based on our common humanity, a strategy for getting us there, and habits of heart and mind to do the job. This is what I believe Chairman Arafat didn't have when we were at Taba: habits of heart and mind that tell us when to fight and when to talk, when to hold fast and when to give a little, when to define the meaning of our lives by standing up for the interests of our crowd today and when to try to build a bigger crowd for tomorrow. What does all this mean in practical terms? I don't want to be too naïve here. Of course we still need a security strategy. We should eradicate Al Qaeda, improve homeland defense, help our friends fighting terror, and limit the production and spread of weapons of mass destruction.

In 1994, I actually prepared for war to stop North Korea from using its plutonium to build six or seven nuclear weapons a year. I won't go into the details, but we made a deal with them and they honored that deal. If they hadn't, they'd probably have over 40 nuclear bombs by now. We almost made an agreement with them to end their missile program, and we did make an agreement with them to end their missile-testing program. Now a few weeks ago, as we learned a few days ago, North Korea admitted that they are trying to make a bomb again. I think the Bush administration is doing the right thing by demanding that they stop and giving diplomacy a chance first. Why? First of all, we have the time to do this and secondly, because giving diplomacy a chance might work, and because involving other people helps us to build an integrated community of people standing up for the safety of the world.

That's what I think should be done in Iraq. I think that Saddam Hussein's biological and chemical stocks and his nuclear program are dangerous. In 1991, the United Nations said, you have to stop it and set up an inspections and destruction system to end it. The inspections uncovered and destroyed more weapons and weapon stocks and missiles and warheads than were destroyed in the Gulf War. But for four years now, there have been no inspections. So, you have to assume those stocks have been built back up. Still, there's a chance to avoid war and to build this sense of international community by getting rid of the ridiculous 1948 restrictions on the inspections and having all nations support going back in. Should we make the effort to do that? Absolutely. Should we rule out the possibility of force? No.

That's my view. We should be moving toward an integrated community but we should realize we're not there yet. We should be trying to build up the United Nations but we should realize that the United Nations itself is an organization that is still in the process of becoming what it ought to be. All of us on the Security Council sometimes cast votes based on our national interest instead of the new world we're trying to build. I do think it would be better if we can go through the UN and try the inspections first even though if the past is prologue, they'll fail. {APPLAUSE} I think it's better because we don't want to give him the incentive to use weapons he has today, and we don't want to be accused of a unilateral preemptive attack that would give others, who might want to do the same thing in the future, an excuse to do likewise; and finally, as all the soldiers here know, no matter how precise your weapons and bombs are, when they're big and powerful and you fire and drop them, innocent people die too. But of course we have to have a security strategy.

Yet a security strategy alone will never work because it basically says when you do something bad, we'll do something worse. It may keep us alive but it won't make peace. We also have to have a strategy to build a world with more partners and fewer enemies. That's the world I grew up in, the world President Truman, the first leader to recognize Israel, and General Marshall made—the Marshall Plan, the United Nations, the International Financial Institutions, the Global Trading System, helping Germany and Japan. They built a world with more partners and fewer enemies. It's a pretty good world for most of us in the baby boom generation. And the logic that underlies the last 50 years applies today with even greater force.

I just came back from Africa, where I was working on issues that are central to what I am trying to do today—bringing economic opportunity to poor people, bridging the divides of tribal conflicts, fighting HIV and AIDS, supporting new democracies. It is amazing how far a little effort goes to make people feel closer to America and the rest of the world. And, I might add, we get richly rewarded for it. I won't go into the details, but I hope, for those of you from Israel and those of you who helped Israel over the last 50 plus years, the logic is self-evident.

Finally, I think we have to build international institutions that work, and America has to be willing to cooperate on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, the Criminal Court, the Climate Change treaty, and the Biological Weapons Convention. A lot of Americans don't want to do that because we give up flexibility and control, but we get credibility and influence in return.

And if we are trying to make a world tht is an integrated community, I also believe we have to keep trying to make peace. I worked in Haiti, Northern Ireland, Bosnia, Kosovo, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Burundi, East Timor, and many other places besides the Middle East. I tried and failed to get the Greeks and Turks to resolve the Cyprus question but they'll have to do it in order for Turkey to be integrated into the community of Europe. And because of the wonderful cooperation that Israel and Turkey have had in recent years, you can clearly see the importance of a modern secular Muslim nation being part of Europe, a bulwark against fundamentalism and terrorism at worst, a door to a new Middle East at best. I tried and failed to get Pakistan and India to end their conflict over Kashmir, but they talk more and we just had encouraging elections there. And I did my best in the Middle East. I have no responsibilities there anymore. I just talk to people and encourage them to do what seems to be the right thing.

After all that has happened, it may be hard to believe that there will ever be peace, but there will be because of the logic of the position that Prime Minister Barak took, the logic of the position that Prime Minister Rabin took, the logic that was behind the agreement at Wye River, the logic of the offer Prime Minister Barak made to Syria, the logic that was behind the belated (and at the time it came, almost revolting) admission by the Chairman Arafat that he would like to have what he turned down at Taba. Someday, this will happen. Maybe there will have to be another interim agreement. Maybe when it happens now after all the innocents have died, there will have to be a big international force there with American forces and security guarantees from the United States and Europe and NATO and others. Whatever it takes, I would do it. We will never have a world at peace until Israel is at peace with its neighbors. We will never have a secure world until Israel is secure with its neighbors. We will never have the kind of world we want as long as Palestinians and some Israelis believe that they can achieve their objectives at the expense of each other's dignity and dreams.

Now let me say in closing, in spite of all these dreary things I've talked about, I am on balance quite hopeful. And I'd like to tell you why. People like us first rose up out of Africa somewhere between 50 and a 100, 000 years ago depending on how you read the archeological evidence. Civilization has been around, if you define the word in terms of the establishment of cities and writings, for about 7,000 years. For most of that time, whether it was genetic or cultural or psychological, most people have looked at those who were different, who were not in their family, their tribe, their village, their crowd, in ways not too different from the way the Al Qaeda looked at all of us in America on September 11th. If you're in our crowd, your life has meaning and dignity. We will honor you and we'll protect you. If you're not, you might as well be a non-person.

It is very difficult to read human history without seeing it as one long matter of people finding positive meaning with reference to their own group and negative meaning with reference to the others. The French and Germans for centuries said, “Thank God, I'm not French. Thank God, I'm not German.” In Northern Ireland, “Thank God, I'm not Catholic. Thank God, I'm not Protestant.” I could go on and on right across the globe. Tiny little Kosovo. “Thank God, I'm not a Muslim. Thank God I'm not an Orthodox Christian.” You can read the whole of human history as a battle of “us” versus “them” with the people who had any sense—the Rabins, the Baraks, the Mandelas, the Gandhis—always trying to expand the definition of “us” and shrink the definition of “them.” That is literally what Gandhi died for. Killed by a fellow Hindu, who thought he was a total heretic because he wanted India for the Muslims and the Hindus and the Buddhists and the Sikhs and the Jains and the Christians and the Jews. Gandhi had a very expansive definition of “us” and a nearly non-existent definition of “them.”

But this was not global policy until after World War II. After we nearly destroyed ourselves in the first fifty years of the 20th century, we established the United Nations. And we ratified the International Declaration of Human Rights after the Holocaust to say that there were some rights common to us just because we are alive. Then it was not practically possible to act on the idea of a global community rooted in common humanity because of the Cold War. Then in the 1970's, China started easing over toward the West. In 1989, the Berlin Wall fell. Then democracy began to sweep Cenral and Eastern Europe. The European Union began to develop. We stopped ethnic cleansing in the Balkans. Russia joined the West in a special relationship with NATO. China joined the World Trade Organization. And then we began to face these terrorisms and the enemies of the nation state all over the world.

If you look at the long sweep of history, we are coming together. Whether biology or culture or economics or psychology or a larger sense of spirit is driving it, we are coming together. What Arafat did in walking away from Ehud Barak's offer at Taba is not the wave of the future. It is the last gasp of an old worldview that has to be erased from the earth. You must believe that. {APPLAUSE} You say, my God, the guy's only 56 years old and he's already in his dotage talking like that. But I'm not running for anything. I say whatever I please now. I'll just close with an example from Africa. I just got back from Rwanda where in 1994, over ten percent of the country, 700,000 people, were killed in a hundred days, largely with machetes. It was the worst genocide in modern times. So I went back and I met with the President and then I went out to visit the memorial to their Holocaust. On the side of a hill, it's just three simple long concrete slabs in tiers with crosses on top and flowers.

There's one and then a ten foot drop to another one, then a ten foot drop to another one. They are all mass graves that contain the remains of 260,000 of that 700,000 people. Every day a grave is left open, and Rwandans keep bringing the remains of their loved ones to the memorial. Most of the victims are from the minority Tutsi tribe, along with people who intermarried with them and people who sympathized with them. Most of those who did the slaughtering were Hutus who are the majority. Today, Rwanda has a Tutsi President, Paul Kagame. First he was Vice President because he insisted that a Hutu be the first president of post-war Rwanda.

After I went to the memorial, I went directly to a little village outside the capital called Enderas. It is a government-designated—listen to this—“reconciliation village.” When you go there to live, you know you will be living with people of the other tribe. I went to the house of a Hutu woman who had adopted two Tutsi children, one of whom had a rare degenerative disease and couldn't live long. She was caring for him. In her front yard, I met twenty of her neighbors. I met a young Hutu soldier who has been hiding out in the Congo. He came home because his president told him that if he hadn't been involved in planning the genocide, he would have to confess what he had done to a local court, and the local people would decide what he must do to live in harmony with the village and he would go on with his life, a local version of what Mandela did in South Africa. The most amazing thing I saw was these two women standing together as neighbors. One of them had lost her father, her husband, and her brother in the genocide. Her neighbor was a Hutu woman whose husband was in prison awaiting war crimes trials. They are living together as neighbors.

Then the governor of the state took me out, a very articulate young woman; she took me to see children dancing together in native costumes, a ceremonial dance . . . the girls and boys, the Hutus and the Tutsis. She said, “this dance for you is the first time they've danced together since 1994, since the killing started.” They were smiling and laughing and almost young again.

The Africans may live in the poorest countries in the world, but they understand something fundamental about the way we have to live. The Hutus and the Tutsis have lived together for five hundred years. They cannot escape each other. And so they have decided instead to find a way to live together and to go on. There's a tribe in Central Africa that greets strangers in this way. If they run into each other and one says “hello,” the other gives a unique response: “I see you.” I see you, you exist. I recognize you. I accept you.

I say all this to ask you not to be discouraged in the face of the madness of these suicides bombings. Most of the Palestinians are not suicide bombers. I say all this to tell you that there is no compelling evidence that we are biologically, genetically condemned to slaughter each other till the end of time. I say all this to remind you of what you already know—that once we are thrown together, bound up together in each other's futures, we have no choice but to create out of our interdependence an integrated community rooted in our common humanity. Therefore, do not be discouraged. Should we defend ourselves? Absolutely. Should we give up on peace? Not on your life. The only final victory in an interdependent world is the one for which Ehud Barak sacrificed his office and Yitzhak Rabin sacrificed his life. Thank you and God bless you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
