{title} Conversation with President Clinton at the Orfalea Center for Global and International Studies {/title}
{event} Santa Barbara, CA {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} October 13, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Actually, you know that point he made, that's what the movie Independence Day was all about, right? Remember that? {LAUGHTER} What is the premise of it? You're laughing. This is a very serious point. What is the premise of it? That we need an outside threat to remind us of the self-evident truth that our common humanity is more important than our interesting differences. {APPLAUSE}

I completely agree that climate change is going to do that. Look it up, there was a full-page ad in the New York Times not very long ago signed by 18, or however many, leaders of Christian Evangelical organizations that had previously been identified as religious political activists in a way that was divisive, not united. "We do think Jesus wants us to save the world," is basically what the ad said, but it was a beautiful ad, really. It was a beautiful idea. So I think he's right.

But on a more mundane and practical level, here's the problem between religious politics and secular politics: no person of faith can possibly participate in any endeavor -- a family, parenthood, a business, politics -- without his or her actions being informed by their faith. That's good. And we should honor that. Minnesota is about to elect the first Muslim Congressman in American history. He looks like an impressive man to me. I think it's a good thing. Why has religion been so divisive in politics? Because of a religious heresy common to all faiths. No Christian, no Jew, no Muslim, no Hindu, no Buddhist can fail to acknowledge the existence of this religious heresy somewhere around the world. And what is that heresy? If you believe in any faith, you believe it represents the Truth, capital "T." Right? It's a long stretch from saying your faith represents the Truth to saying that you can be in full possession of the truth, and that you can turn it into a political program that's fully true, and anybody that rejects your program is less human than you are and deserves to die. That is the heresy.

That is what is wrong with the fundamentalist terrorists who are Muslims, but that is what is wrong in the fight in Sri Lanka between the Hindu Tamils and the Sinhalese Buddhists. That is what is wrong in the fight between the Hindus and the Muslims in Western India over what should happen to the beautiful old mosque that was torn down, and they want to build a Hindu temple where they believe the blue-skinned god Rama died over 1,500 years ago. That's what's wrong in all these fights. In America, when people are demonized when they don't agree with people who are part of the Christian right who say, "We do have possession of absolute truth, and you're not a good human being if you don't agree with us," it's a religious heresy. It's a heresy. Why?

The most important Christian writer, St. Paul, said -- everybody at these Christian weddings, they always read the provision, the verse from Paul's letter to the Corinthians, "Now abideth faith, hope, and love, these three; and the greatest of these is love," actually doesn't belong at a wedding because the love that he is talking about is love for humanity, not romantic love. Why in the world would a Christian writer say that love is greater than religious faith? Read this. Go home. All of you that are Christians, you go home and read this tonight. First Corinthians 13, two verses above it. It says "For now on this earth, I see through a glass darkly, but then," i.e., in life after death, face-to-face, "now I know in part, but then," in life after death, "I will know even as I am known." The reason love is more important than faith is because you see through a glass darkly and you know in part. All other faiths have some of the same things. The Torah says, "He who turns aside a stranger might as well turn aside from the most God." The Koran says that Allah put different people on the earth not that they might despise one another, but that they might come to know one another. The Dharmapada, the Buddha, says that "You're not fully human unless you feel the pain of another as an arrow stuck in your own body." And the human genome researchers found out that all human beings are 99.9 percent the same. So the problem is not that people in politics bring their religion. Not that there's an honest debate about abortion or gay marriage or whatever you want to do. The problem comes when someone says, "I have the absolute truth. I have turned it into an absolutely true political program, and if you don't like it you are less human than I am." That's the problem. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
