{title} Remarks at Peoplesoft Event {/title}
{event} New Orleans, LA {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} August 29, 2002 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you, Craig, for the wonderful introduction. Thank you, Dave Duffield for your leadership. I thank all the team that came back to meet me. I'd like to thank all of you for showing up. I've spent a few nights in New Orleans, and I can't believe you're here. {LAUGHTER} I couldn't compete with Gladys Knight last night and I know that most of you probably didn't go home after she finished.

I love this place and I thank you for giving me the chance to come back. I first came to New Orleans when I was 3 years old and my widowed mother was a nursing student here. I came back when I was 15, when I was 21, and every time I could possibly come since then. The people here have been very good to me. They voted for me twice and enabled me to carry Louisiana, but mostly they are experts in the art of living. They work to live not the other way around, so it's a great place to come.

I'd also like to thank you for playing my song, “Don't Stop Thinking About Tomorrow.” I hadn't planned to do this but since you did arrange for me to walk out to that song, which was my theme song in 1992, I think I'll begin my remarks with it.

In 1991, I was in Los Angeles and I was being driven around as a Governor by a young man named Sean Landres, who later became a Divinity student and married a young woman from Central Europe. Back then, we still had tape decks not CD players in cars. You remember 1991? {LAUGHTER} So this young man, who was 21 years old, looks at me and he said, “Governor, I think you may run for President and if you do, this ought to be your theme song.” And he puts on Fleetwood Mac singing “Don't Stop Thinking About Tomorrow.” I looked at him and I said, “You were barely alive when they made that song.” {LAUGHTER} He said, “Maybe, but it resonates with me now.” So I ran, it was my theme song, and just a few days before I left the White House for the last time, we had a farewell party for all the people who had been in the Cabinet and the Administration and on the staff and Fleetwood Mac staged a rare union, and came to the South Lawn of the White House and sang, “Don't Stop Thinking About Tomorrow.”

I say that because that is, essentially, the key to your success and what we, as Americans, have to be doing now. When I took office in January of 1993, there were only 50 sites on the Worldwide Web. The Internet was still largely the province of research physicists. When I left office, there were 350 million sites with the number going up exponentially.

Now I am writing a personal memoir at our home in Chappaqua, New York. And yesterday, I asked my young Research Assistant, Justin Cooper, to check on something for me. I'd written about going to a movie in Dallas in December of 1957, and I said I thought I had gone to see “How the West Was Won” but I discovered the movie wasn't made until 1962. {LAUGHTER} So Justin said, “That's no problem.” So he finds this website that has every movie made in the 20th Century in America listed by the month it came out. So we pulled up all the ones that came out in September, October, November and December of 1957. I concluded that it was either “Raintree County” or “Bridge on the River Kwai.” Then the website asked me if I wanted to see the trailer from “Raintree County,” 45 years old. So I said I did, and I watched Montgomery Cliff, and Elizabeth Taylor, and Eva Marie Saint on the Internet replaying a movie I had seen when I was 11.

When PeopleSoft got started 15 years ago, I doubt that even your most visionary people knew just how much technology would transform the way we communicate, the way we live, the way we do business, how much our world would change and how much our idea of human potential would expand. Your company helped to fuel that progress and I am grateful for what you did and are doing. It was my great honor to serve as President when we moved into a new century and a new millennium and fully into the global information age. Most of what happened was quite good for us and much of what happened was quite good for the rest of the world.

Now the world is consumed with two great challenges, the challenge of terror with the accompanying danger of weapons of mass destruction and the deep roots that so much terror has and racial, ethnic, religious and tribal hatred. And the challenge of the global economy and the American economy, where there has been so much market value lost, questions of business ethics and around the world, where there's a wholesale assault on globalization by people who say they speak for the world's poor and those of us who support an integrated global economy are hurting them.

Both the security and the economic pictures are much more complex, I believe, than they are often presented and so I'd like to offer a few observations about the economy and about the security issues and then open the floor to questions. I feel very strongly that I ought to spend more time answering questions because I'm interested in what you want to talk about.

Let's start with the economy. The protestors against the global economy always forget to say that this globalizing economy has lifted more people out of poverty in the last 20 years than ever before in human history. Poor countries that chose growth through openness to trade and investment grew at an average of 5% a year. Poor countries that are closed grew at an average of 1% a year. Infant mortality is down, life expectancy is up, more people than ever are in school, even in poor countries. So that's a part of the story you don't often hear.

On the other hand, it is also true that the global economy is not working for half the world. Half the world lives on less than $2 a day, a billion people live on less than $1 a day, 130 million kids never go to school, 10 million children die every year of preventable childhood diseases, 1 in 4 of all the people who will die this year will die of AIDS, TB and Malaria and infections related to diarrhea, most of them little children that never got a glass of clean water. So the picture is complicated.

The same thing is true in the American economy. When I took office, the stock market was at 3,200. It more than tripled while we were there. Got up above 11,000. Now it's lost several trillion dollars in wealth. Now there's more than one thing going on here. Yes, it's true, there was some serious corporate chicanery, some bogus accounting and a lot of people who were hurt. Enron and many other countries deserve to be angry and deserve to be compensated. But there were other things that happened. We had over-capacity in telecom and there was bound to be a correction. We had bid up a lot of the dot com stock too high, investors anticipating that even non-profitable companies would ultimately be bought by somebody that was profitable, adding to their productivity, and there was bound to be a correction. The correction was more severe than it would have been and should have been, had it not been for examples of gross misconduct and phony accounting and the feeling that a lot of our friends around the world had, that we made a terrible mistake in going from surpluses back to deficits and in remaining disengaged from the economic problems of Latin America and other parts of the globe. And so, as so often happens with markets, those who think it was a little too high would have to concede that now it's quite a bit too low.

What are we going to do? In short order, I think we should continue to do what we know works. We should continue to open more markets to American products and services and open our markets to competition from around the world. We should address the fact that we have gone from a projected surplus of $5.7 trillion dollars over the next 10 years to deficits and we should address that. I'm not running for anything, so I can tell you what I think. {LAUGHTER} I think it was crazy to have a big tax cut and to give people in my income group a tax cut. {APPLAUSE} I think it was wrong. It was actually a good thing, given the economic slowdown, to give middle-class and lower middle income-working people a tax cut so they could maintain some reasonable consumption patterns and alleviate the impact of the recession. It was necessary after September 11th to spend some more money. We were going to have a short-term deficit, but the permanent deficit we have built in is coming because that tax cut is too big. I never had a nickel until I left the White House. {LAUGHTER} So I always expected it was true. I now know. What I want is low interest rates, a stable economy, an opportunity for growth to occur and the people that serve here at this Convention Center to be able to send their kids to college so we'll have a stable society. That's what I think we need. {APPLAUSE}

You know, we've been told we all have to sacrifice to fight terror and poor people have been asked to give up after-school programs and training programs and the middle-class has been asked to give up the certainty they had when I left office; that when the baby boomers retire, Social Security and Medicare would be there and they wouldn't have to bankrupt their kids and their ability to raise their grandkids. So they've been asked to sacrifice a lot. What have upper income people like me been asked to sacrifice? We've been asked to expend the energy necessary to open the envelope containing our tax cut. It's given us deficits and it's not fair and it's not right. It's not necessary. It's bad economics. That's what I believe. So I hope that that will be changed. {APPLAUSE}

Now I also believe we should be much more aggressively involved in the rest of the world. There's a conference on sustainable development in South Africa now. I think we should be committed to the right sort of debt relief and aid for poor nations to make more trading partners and I think we should do much more to try to get all the kids of the world in school. I think that we should, finally, have the right sort of correction with some of the problems we've seen coming to light in the last few months.

I think it's important, for example, to stop the accounting companies from also being management consultants to the same company. I think that's an important thing to do. My Securities & Exchange Commissioner tried to do that in the late 90's and the Congress stopped him. There's been a change of heart now in the Congress and they're going to do that. I think it's important and I have slightly draconian views on this - not to let people just engage in an accounting gimmick to move their operations offshore to beat American taxes. That imposes too much burden on the rest of you who are left behind and it's wrong. It's wrong to take advantage of the opportunities of the American economy and then put money in an offshore subsidiary solely to beat the taxes and leave the rest of you holding the bill. We just ought to stop that. {APPLAUSE} We've got to have a very tough, unambiguous position.

On the other hand, I think we have to be somewhat more sophisticated about how we handle stock options. A lot of people go to work for companies and stay with companies because they can become owners of the company, because they can share in the profits and they're willing to take the risk and they don't have management. Most companies don't have managers who unforgivably take the money and run and leave the employees and the customers and the investors holding the bag. Most people who run companies are honest people doing good things. So there may be an argument for some different expensing treatment or some stock options, but when they're designed to be a long-term loyalty and participation in the company and genuinely share the wealth by people who aren't about to take the money and run. I think that that means that we have to have a very careful approach to this and not throw the baby out with the bath water.

Because I think we want people to continue to want to work for and own part of companies. One problem that I think has happened in the last few years is that the raising of capital from Wall Street has become so important that a fairly significant number of companies have actually hired people to run the companies who knew not about the mission of the company, but about how to do well on Wall Street. What happens is that we have created a culture in some parts of our economy, where people are under enormous pressure to do well on Wall Street and almost inevitably neglect why the company was set up in the first place and what it's supposed to do.

I'll give you a contrary example. In 1987, in October, the stock market had its biggest drop since 1924. It dropped 500 points in a day, back when that was a real drop. The then-richest man in America, Sam Walton, was in my office, the Governor's Office in Little Rock, when the market closed. By pure coincidence, we were talking about something else. Now Sam Walton was a Republican. As far as I know, he never voted for me, but we were friends. So when the market closed, I said, “Sam, how much money did you lose today?” He said, “Oh, a little over a billion dollars.” Now, he got started in '87. A billion dollars was real money back in '87, you know? {LAUGHTER} And I said, “Well, how do you feel?” He said, “Bill, I'm going to West Tennessee tomorrow, where I've got a new store and I'm going to fly over it in my little plane. If there are pickup trucks in the parking lot, I'm not going to worry about the market. I'm not selling my stock. I'm in the business of being Wal Mart and I just want my employees and my investors to recover their value and we will recover our value as long as we keep putting pickups in the parking lot and selling people things they want to buy.” So markets always go up and down. The question is what is the primary purpose of the business people who are running the show? No one ever thought Sam Walton would take the money and run.

I'll give you another example. Another Republican, as far as I know, never voted for me, but he was a friend of mine. {LAUGHTER} Ken Iverson founded a company called Nucor. They made steel, rebar steel, all over the They were about the second or third most productive steel company anywhere in the world. They have a dozen plants or more in the United States. I got one of them for Arkansas when I was Governor. The Nucor workers got weekly bonuses, a $1,500 a year supplement, back in the 80's, for every kid they had in college. One man in South Carolina educated 11 children working for Nucor, and a strict no layoff policy, which means if they had to cutback, everybody took a pay cut across the board.

So Nucor didn't lose any money in 80's when all the other manufacturers were getting killed in the middle of the country, except in one year. And Iverson sent a letter around to the I still have a copy of it in my file somewhere. Saying, “It's terrible what happened to you. Our revenues are down 20%. I've got to cut your bonus 20%. I feel terrible because it's not your problem. You did everything you could do, everything I asked, but the economy's bad. You hired me to figure out how to get around a bad economy and I couldn't do it this year, so while I'm cutting you 20%, I'm taking a 60% cut.” Needless to say, the Nucor workers did not quit, did not revolt and were willing to walk through hot molten steel for Ken Iverson, because he didn't take the money and run. He gave up the money and stayed.

What's really eating on the American people today are companies that seem to practice what I call “Reverse Titanic Economics.” They throw the women and children overboard and the Captain and the crew sail to Tahiti with the money. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

But the only point I want to make is you don't work for a company like that and you're here proud to be doing what you're doing. Most American companies are good and strong and honest. Look at these certified statements that came out, that they're now being required to make. Not that many people had to restate their earnings.

So what is it we want to stop? We want to stop overstatement of income, understatement of liabilities, bad accounting practices. We want to stop this “take the money and run” mentality. We want to stop people making you pay more taxes so they could pay less by having a phony relocation to some tax haven, when they're really operating here. We want to do that not only to stop bad behavior, but so people will have confidence in our markets again and money will pour back in, generating growth and jobs and opportunity. What we do not want to do is to over-react to the point where people don't want to invest their money, don't want to take a chance. Don't want to give other people the chance to build companies like yours. So we have to have a very sensitive nuance view of this and I hope we will.

But the main thing I want to say to you is, this is still a great country with a strong economy and I want to say the same thing about our fight against terror. A lot of this stuff should scare you, but we haven't been around here over 200 years by accident. We've been around here because more than half the time, more than half the people have done what was necessary to keep freedom and security alive and that's exactly what we're going to do now.

So let me move now just briefly to the security issues. When a President leaves office, he always has kind of an exit interview with the incoming President. And I had two interesting ones, one with President Bush and another with President Bush. {LAUGHTER} It was interesting. So when I met with former President Bush I remember this. He was really good. And considering the fact that we had a difficult campaign, I was very respectful of and never forgot the way he treated me and our people and the way we worked together. So he told me what he thought the major security problems were, so I did the same thing. And I'd been thinking a lot about it. I said, “Well, I think the major problems are terrorism, in general, and bin Laden and the al-Qaeda network, in particular. The turmoil in the Middle East, which was then beginning to build again, after 7 or 8 years of real progress toward peace. The trouble with India and Pakistan over Kashmir and the fact they both have nuclear power. The fact that North Korea still had a missile program, which could be used to give missiles to bad people who would hurt us and the continued persistence of racial, religious, ethnic and tribal hatreds by people who might have access to weapons of mass destruction and it, that turned out to be a pretty good list of what the problems were. They were all things we had worked very hard on.

There is a specific security agenda America has to pursue. We need to finish the job in Afghanistan and stay there until we find bin Laden and clean out the entire al Qaeda network. They're still the most dangerous in the world and that's still the most important thing, in my view.

Secondly, we need to As soon as these Palestinian elections are held in January (if we can wait that long, but it looks like we're determined to) start the peace process up again in the Middle East. The trouble in the Middle East fuels a lot of the turmoil, misrepresentation and hatred in other parts of the world. It's not just about the Israelis and the Palestinians, and the end of it is clear. I mean, basically there has to be an absolute guaranty of Israel's security. There has to be a State for the Palestinians for the West Bank in Gaza. There has to be money to develop that area. But the United States and our European allies and Russia and others have to be willing to give absolute security guarantees both to Israel and the new Palestinian State because once we have a Peace Agreement, they'll have all the same enemies. They'll have terrorists trying to undermine both of them.

But I don't think that people who have not dealt with this can possibly over-estimate. You just can't imagine how much this turmoil in the Middle East contributes to what people try to do to people we care about and values we share all over Asia and some parts of Latin America and elsewhere.

The third thing we need to do is to help our friends, from Columbia, to Indonesia, to the Philippines, to defend themselves against terrorists. We need to build our domestic defenses. And that's I know you've been discussing this. But one of the things that shocked me after September the 11th and I did not know was, that after we tripled the funds for counter-terrorism for our law enforcement in the wake of Oklahoma City in '95 and '96, we hired a lot more people. They did a good job, but we did nothing to modernize our information systems. So that they were not interconnected and they did not have access to things that private companies have. For example, there are a lot of companies that sell mailing lists and do mass mailings for a living that had all these terrorists in their files before September the 11th.

One of them is headquartered in Arkansas, where I used to live, and I went up there and found Muhammad Atta in the computers of the company, with 12 addresses. Now if we had that information, the same information that's available on you and me, and you say, “Somebody's been here less than year. If they've got 12 addresses, they're either really rich or they're up to no good.”

Another man had 30 credit cards and $250,000 in debt, another one of the al-Qaeda killers. The business community of America helped to finance his murderous behavior. He had 30 credit cards and a quarter of a million dollars in debt, was on a consolidated payout schedule of $9,800 a month. Now, we ought to be able to do a check on that. If a person has more than 5 credit cards and more than $20,000 or $30,000 in debt, after being here only 6 months, they're either real wealthy or up to no good. It ought to be easy to figure out which. And there are lots of other information technology issues that need to be addressed, which I know that you're all interested in. So these are all things that need to be done.

Having said that, let me say that just like the global economy, there is another side to this. The news is not all bleak and terrifying. Consider this, we nearly destroyed ourselves in World War II and then we had a long Cold War. Now we're getting along with our adversaries in both World War II and the Cold War, cooperating on all important fronts. We created a World Trade Organization and bought China into it. The Nation States of the world, in general, are moving toward greater cooperation on security and other areas. A lot of work has been done and many more terrorist incidents have been stopped in the last 10 years than have occurred. Mostly they get a minor mention in the Press, they're what my National Security Advisor in my first term, Tony Lake, called “the dogs that don't bark.” He said, “You know, if you do a good job in foreign policy, you can't get any credit because the dogs don't bark.”

But you should know that there are lots and lots of career people who They were there before I got there and they're there now, who have worked hard to prevent terrorist incidents from occurring. We've had a serious effort to build our bioterrorism defenses since 1979. There are a lot of things that are going on. So while I think we should be alarmed. I think we should take this seriously. I think we should expect that these will be the set of security threats that we'll have to face for the next several years. I don't think you should be despairing. The forces of destruction are not going to defeat America or freedom or the growing coming together of the 21st Century world unless we give up and give in, and I don't think that we or freedom-loving people anywhere in the world are about to do that. {APPLAUSE}

Now, let me try to put this into some perspective and then I'll answer questions. Because beyond the economic issues, beyond the security issues, there are these sort of big philosophical questions. If I ask you to describe the world you live in today in a word, what would you say? Most people would use the word “globalization.” You might use the “global information age” because of what you do. I prefer the “age of interdependence.” We are more dependent on one another in ways that are good and bad then ever before. We are more vulnerable to one another. We live in a world where we've torn down walls, collapsed distances and spread information and technology more widely than ever before. On balance, that's been really good for you, but on September the 11th, the al-Qaeda terrorists used those forces. They used open borders, easy travel, and access to information and technology to murder 3,100 people from 70 countries in the United States.

So that says to me what we have to do is to take this interdependent world we live in and keep trying to make it an integrated, global community of shared values, shared responsibilities and shared benefits. We have to move from interdependence to integration. That's the model I have in my head when I think about every specific thing I tried to do as President and that I advocate today. Will it make us more of an integrated community?

And a lot of this is really about ideas. Are we thinking about today and yesterday? Or are we thinking about tomorrow? The Middle East is awash in violence partly because both parties are thinking about yesterday's grievances, which make today's problems seem insoluble. The most successful Arab country in the Middle East now is Dubai. I went to the Internet City in Dubai a few weeks ago. They had nobody there 3 years ago. They have 26,000 people working there now, average age 28, most of them from other countries. I went into the lunchroom. They had restaurants from 7 different nations. But it's a Muslim country with an Islamic banking system with no interest for people whose faith requires that. They haven't given up their faith. They just get up in the morning thinking about tomorrow and keeping about their common humanity and feeling confident that they can celebrate what is unique about them within the context of a community that's integrated. It's dramatically different.

I could give you lots of other examples, but that is the single most important thing that I have to say to you. People who believe in their common humanity and think about tomorrow have a chance to make the world a safe and a prosperous place and the most interesting place in all of human history. People who can't let go of old resentments and negative references to people who have different racial and religious and ethnic groups are destined to give us a world that is awful in its complications because none of us can escape our interdependence. So we're either going to have all the vulnerability that goes with interdependence or we're going to have to move to a more integrated global community.

Now, I'll say again, you shouldn't despair. For most of human history and pre-history, people have defined themselves in positive terms with reference to people in their group and by negative reference to outsiders. When people first came out of caves and clans, there was probably some reason for that, but we just kept on doing it. So far all the progress of the world, we nearly destroyed civilization in World War II. Then we had this long Cold War. Then China decided to move toward the West and the Berlin Wall fell in 1989. We have not had a chance to make an integrated global community except for the last 13 years. Your company was 2 years old by the time the possibility of building an integrated global community was really before us for the first time in all of human history. So we have to learn how think differently and imagine differently and behave differently. We have to have values and ideas and emotions that are consistent with the connections that have brought such prosperity to this company, but we can do it.

I will just close with one story. In 1994, we had an awful genocide in Rwanda. The majority Hutus took after the minority Tootsies and their supporters and killed somewhere between 500,000 700,000 people in 100 days without high tech weapons, mostly with machetes. When I went to Africa in my second term, my wife and I wanted to go to Rwanda and see the people there because we had tried to help rebuild the country afterward, and because frankly, I felt terribly that we were so involved in trying to stop the Bosnian War, we didn't stop that one.

And so I asked if they would get me some survivors of the Rwandan genocide to talk about the future, and they were an interesting lot. I had a priest. I had this really attractive guy who had lost his arm above the elbow to a machete and said, “He was a one-armed man for peace.” A lot of interesting people, all clearly carrying the marks of this horrible encounter. So we got down to the last person who was supposed to speak to us and she had no visible marks on her body. She was dressed out in this beautiful bright African dress, a costume of the late country of where Rwanda is. And she said very calmly, she said, “You see no marks on my body because I was cut on the back and around the neck. I am a Tootsie. We lived next door to Hutus. They were our friends. Our children played together. We observed the holidays together, but when the killing start, started and they came to our village. My neighbors sold us out. They told these people that we were of the other tribe and they came for us. I thought I would surely be killed, but then I awoke in a pool of my own blood to see my husband and 6 children hacked to death in front of me.

You think about this in the context of what we've been through now in the World Trade Center and the Middle East and all this. She said, “I awoke in a pool of my own blood to see my husband and my 6 children hacked to death in front of me. First, I asked God why I had not been killed too, because I did not want to live. Then I realized that I must have been spared for some purpose and it could not be something as mean as vengeance and so I do what I can to help us start again.” I'll never forget that woman as long as I live.

All this technology has got to free us to make these human connections. We cannot build a global economy and leave half the world out. We cannot build a security policy that is only based on defense and is not about winning the battle of hearts and minds and ideas. We have a world that is interdependent. We have to make it integrated, rooted in basic, simple concepts. Everybody counts. Everybody has a role to play. We all do better when we work together. Our differences are important but our common humanity matters more.

There's a tribe in Africa where the standard greeting that we say, “Hi, how are you doing?” “I'm fine.” Goes like this. When people, strangers, meet each other walking, one says, “Hello.” And the response is, “I see you.” Think about it. “I see you.” I become more of a person in relation to you. You exist. I see you.

The biggest problem we've got with all these terrorists is they think they can find their redemption in our destruction. Instead of getting up every morning and thinking about tomorrow, they're thinking about yesterday's grievance. The biggest problem the rest of the world has with us is, they don't resent our success. That's not what they resent. They resent the fact that they think we don't know enough, care enough or do enough to help them share in our success.

So just as these terrorists can never find their redemption in our destruction, we can't succeed in the 21st Century, if we keep claiming for ourselves opportunities we deny to others. We have no choice but to try to move this highly interdependent world that you and people like you have done so much to create into a genuinely integrated global community. If we do it, the next 50 years will be by far the most interesting, prosperous time the world has ever known. Thank you very much. 

{/speech}
