{title} Transcript: Keynote Address of President Clinton at Campus Progress National Student Conference {/title}
{event} Campus Progress National Student Conference {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} July 13, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much, Stephanie, not only for that wonderful introduction, but for your work. I am just about to go back to Rwanda. Friday night, I'm on my way back to Africa to see the places where we're working and I will see John Podesta's daughter, who is working with our foundation against AIDS in the Lesotho. So I am delighted to be here with them.

I want to tell you that John Podesta did a magnificent job as White House Chief of Staff. We had been friends since 1970. We both looked a lot – well, different anyway, 35 years ago. I was laughing, you know, for most of my life I was the youngest person doing whatever I was doing. One day I woke up and I was the oldest person in every room I entered, and I see that that has not changed today, so I am delighted to be here and very grateful for the work John is doing here and the work that he is doing on environmental causes: another passion that we both share.

You've had a lot people who I have been associated with already appear here: Paul Begala, Dee Dee Myers, Susan Rice, Carole Browner, my great friend, Congressman John Lewis. You had Thomas Frank, who wrote that wonderful book, What's the Matter With Kansas? I loved his analysis of the Republicans. I didn't agree with what he said about my trade policy and if you want me to discuss that, I'll do it. {LAUGHTER} But it's still a book very much worth reading.

I would like to sort of shorten the remarks that I had intended to give and give more time for questions so we can speak more about what you're interested in, but there are two or three things that I would like to say by way of introduction.

The first relates to what Stephanie said about the work that I am now doing on tsunami relief for the UN and with my AIDS project, and it is this: you don't have to wait till your party's in power to have an impact on life at home and around the world. Since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, three sweeping historical developments have occurred which have changed forever the potential of your generation. The first is that, for the first time in history more than half the people of the world live under governments they voted in. And that's quiet a statement when you consider the fact that China is not yet a democracy even though they have genuine elections in over 900,000 small villages and only the mayors of the biggest cities are appointed. That doesn't guarantee you good government, but it does guarantee that you can get rid of bad government, and that is an important thing.

The second significant development is the explosive power of the Internet. When I became President, believe it or not, in 1993, January, when the average cell phone still weighed 5 pounds, there were only 50 sites on the Internet: 50. When I left there were 50 million – in eight years – and now there's, of course, many multiples of that. It's almost as if you don't have your own web page, you don't have an identity anymore.

That also has changed things. Do you remember when the SARS epidemic came out in Hong Kong and then in Tokyo? In the beginning, the Chinese government was sort of in denial and you can't handle an epidemic unless all hands on deck are cooperating aggressively. SARS has the potential to kills hundreds of thousands of people in a hurry. There was a citizen revolt in China led by young people; this time not in Tiananmen Square, but over the Internet. A flood of thousands upon thousands upon thousands of messages were hammering into the Chinese websites and all of a sudden the Chinese government changed its position, began to cooperate, including with the American Center for Disease Control, the Canadian authorities, and the SARS epidemic will shut down in one of the classic examples of how a potential tragedy ought to be handled, all generated by ordinary Chinese people over the internet.

And the third thing that has happened is the growth of the nongovernmental organizations, the NGOs; people who were standing in the gaps between ordinary citizens' lives and unfettered behavior of the free market and whatever the government policy is in whatever country you're talking about. The biggest NGO in the world is the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. They have spend a billion and a half dollars in India and Africa alone on healthcare. They spent hundreds of millions of dollars on education in America trying to modernize our high schools and make them more globally competitive – very important. But there are a lot of NGOs that you never hear about that are also changing the lives of every person they touch. One with which I've had the privilege of working, as well as Hillary, is the Self-Employed Women's Association, SEWA, in India, which has literally revolutionized the lives of not only a lot of poor women in Indian villages, but the villages themselves by providing microcredit and other supports to diversify and lift the economies among poor people.

And I remember one day two or three years ago I was shaving in the morning and I looked in the mirror and I thought, my God, I have become an NGO! And somehow I never thought about it before, but I realized, you know, when I left the White House, I was too young to retire and not good enough to either play my saxophone or take my golf clubs around on a professional basis, so I had to keep working. And I tried to define what I could do that would be of some enduring value, whether or not I agreed with the policies of my government or any other one. So I began to work on providing economic opportunity in America and around the world, on trying to deal with the AIDS crisis, and working in a private capacity for religious, racial and ethnic reconciliation, and also trying to help countries with their governance issues, trying – because there is a lot of talk in the papers today about corruption in poor countries. And it is a big source of discussion, you know, around the G8 meeting in Gleneagles. You know, will this aid do any good if these countries are corrupt? I would say, based on my experience, which is fairly substantial, that lack of capacity is a bigger problem than corruption in most new democracies and that the lack of capacity leads to corruption. If people think that a government can't function anyway and their problems can't be solved anyway, it's easy to sort of slip into the path of least resistance. So I work on these things and you can too.

That's the first thing I want to tell. You do not have to wait to be satisfied with the results of any election to have an impact on the future. You heard Stephanie talking about Darfur. That is a classic example.

The second thing I would like to say is a little something about politics. There are a lot of problems which cannot be solved without appropriate government policy. We have been engaged in this country in a huge debate that has become increasingly polarized. It really began in the 1960s. The country had more or less a consensus about how we ought to be governed all during the New Deal and World War II. It began to break apart in Harry Truman's presidency when he lost the Congress in part for trying to give the American people healthcare: the same reason I lost it. That ought to tell you something about what's the matter with our politics. It happened twice in 50 years.

But we built up another consensus after John Kennedy was assassinated, and it came apart again over our differences over the Vietnam War, civil rights, the rise of women, Roe v. Wade, and a lot of other cultural issues. And then, in the late ‘70s, the so-called religious right rose and merged with the ideological conservatives and Main Street Republicans to bring President Reagan to office in the 1980 elections. And we had the first round of supply-side economics, which is that arithmetic doesn't matter anymore. Economics is theology, taxes are evil and bad, there is no such thing as a bad tax no matter how much money you spend as a good tax. And we've been fighting this ever since in fits and starts.

This has worked dramatically to the advantage of the Republicans because they started realizing they were in an intellectual hole in the 1960s and they have been working for 40 years to shape the debate. And one of the things they've done is to shape the way that our friends in the mainstream media write stories. So, for example, if you are a Democrat and you have sort of normal impulses, you're a sell-out. Like when Hillary said abortion is a tragedy for virtually everybody who undergoes it and we ought to do what we can to reduce abortions, because the Republicans have hammered the debate and divided the country in the minds – in the mind, not in reality – in the minds of the people who write about it. All of a sudden, is she selling out? Is she abandoning her principles? But if John McCain, who is pro-life, works with Hillary on global warming, he is a man of principle moving to the middle. If President Bush appoints a moderate to the Supreme Court, we won't say he sold out the right. We'll say, oh, how grand it is! Right? But if you are a Democrat and you talk to somebody in the middle: oh, my God, you have no convictions, you have no backbone and you never believed anything. That is a tribute to the relentless power of 40 years of intellectual argument and bifurcating the thought process of virtually everybody who writes and thinks about politics in America, and it violates human nature, it violates the facts before us, and its nuts, which is why it's a good thing you're here.

When Hillary made this speech – well, there was one great article in the New Republic by Peter Beinart who actually went to the trouble to go back and look at what she had said and done for the last 25 or 30 years and he said, “Whoa, there's a remarkable consistency here. A young man named Andrew Churney did the same thing on my records. He said, “How can you say Clinton had no consistency in conviction? You may not agree with him, but he's basically said and done the same thing for 30 years.”

And that is a profoundly important thing. If you win the battle of ideas, it may have the unintended consequence of changing the sort of framework within which people view the other guys, too, so it's is really important. You have to ask yourself – and you don't have to agree with me, but first the beginning of an effective, progressive politics is the ability to answer for yourselves and to achieve some rough consensus on four questions: One, what is the status of the modern world? Where am I? What is the fundamental nature of the world I live in? Two, what do I want it to look like when my children and grandchildren are older? Three, what are the values that underlie this vision? And four, what is the strategy for getting there, including the role of government?

You've got to be able to answer that. When President Reagan got elected he said the world is divided between good and evil: I'm for good. How do we get it? Low taxes and big defense spending and moving the country to a more socially conservative position. And essentially, President Bush had a modernized version of that, wrapped in the most brilliant political slogan in my lifetime, “compassionate conservatism,” which is the only way he could win since we had a 65 percent approval rating. It was, “I'll give you everything they did with a smaller government and a bigger tax cut.” Wouldn't you like that?

But the point is they understand these. They understand you have to ask and answer big questions and you have to understand what is the fundamental nature of the modern world? Interdependence, we cannot escape each other. Everybody knows what it means economically, everybody knows what it means on the internet, but there are a lot of negative interdependence examples. I mean, on 9/11 you had people from 70 countries, including over 200 other Muslims, murdered in New York City. Hillary and I visited an elementary school where the kids had to move their school. There were 600 kids from 80 different national and ethnic groups. Apparently, the people who did the London bombing were British citizens who were Muslims from Pakistan, at least that is what today's stories are.

But the point is that this interdependence can be positive or negative, and I would argue that it is inherently unstable because it's both positive and negative. That's what I would argue. You don't have to agree with me, but you have to have in your mind what is the fundamental character of the modern world.

Second question, where do you want it to go? What do you want it to look like when your kids and your grandchildren are alive? I answer that I want us to move from interdependence to more integrated communities, locally, nationally and globally. What's the definition of an integrated community? Shared responsibilities, shared benefits and opportunities, and shared values. That's my answer to the second question.

What are those shared values? How in the world can you have shared values in a world as diverse as ours? Well, the answer to the first question is, you can't if you believe you are in possession of the absolute truth and if you believe that that truth can be translated into a political program. Then all possibility of shared values vanishes because somebody that doesn't agree with you on something is by definition outside the family of humanity. Then it's okay to kill them if you are a terrorist, or just malign them if you are an extremist in America. But all you got to do is say, “I am a human being. I am subject to error. I might be wrong every now and then.” Then you can have shared values. Every person matters, every person deserves a chance, every person has a responsible role to play. Competition is good, but it only works within a community of established shared rules. Our differences are important. They do matter. They make life more interesting. But in the end, our common humanity matters more. That's my answer.

That brings you the last question: what is the role of government? How do we get from here to there? My argument is that we get from here to there with the government that establishes the conditions and gives people the tools to fulfill those values, that has a security policy that deals with terror and weapons of mass destruction, that has a policy to make a world with more friends and fewer terrorists, because we cannot kill, jail, or occupy all our adversaries and if you can't do that you got to make a deal. That's where politics comes in. That has a policy that builds international cooperation, institutional cooperation. The big difference between us and the Republicans is not so much what we want to do, but how we want to do it in the world. And Madeleine Albright – I can't claim credit for this – she had best one-line description of it. She said “We favor a world where we cooperate when we can and act alone when we must. They favor a world where they act alone when then can and cooperate when they must.” Very important distinction. It's why I signed Kyoto and they got out of it. I signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and they got out of it. I was for the International Criminal Court against war crimes and they weren't. These are honestly held convictions. Why I wanted trade agreements with labor and environmental standards and the same enforcement, and this Dominican Republic-Central American Trade Agreement seemed to have labor and environmental standards, but took the enforcement out of it. It's a whole different attitude, deeply held, honestly held on both sides.

But fundamentally, we believe that government is essential to creating the vision we want and enacting the values we want in our lives and that you have to create the conditions and give people the tools to make the most with their own lives. That's the way I think about everything. If you ask me any question today on any issue, my answer will be dictated by a course of action that I believe will give us more shared responsibility, shared benefits and opportunities, and a shared community of values because we're having more diversity not just in the world, but in every community in America and across the globe.

Final question: how do the Democrats win again? Jim Fallows has got a great article in the – I think the Atlantic Monthly or one of those magazines, which is an alleged memo to the president in 2012, and he said, “You know, the first 12 years of this century have been a disaster. The Republicans couldn't govern and the Democrats couldn't get elected.” So here is the mess we are in. The truth is that we are in better shape than it appears we are. The Congress is more evenly divided and because the Republicans have done the last reapportionment or two it's harder for us to win back. And because smaller states are more likely to be red states, they have a big advantage in the Senate, which is not a democratic institution by the founders' design.

But if you look at the national preferences, we are in way better shape than we were in the 1980s. President Carter won by two points in 1976 when he was a Southern Governor, a Born-Again Christian, a graduate of the Naval Academy, and a peanut farmer. After Watergate, he won by two points. He should have won by 20 points, but the cultural aversion of white Protestants, especially married white Protestants, to voting for a Democrat was so deep he was actually – it was a triumph. Then in ‘80, ‘84 and ‘88, we never won more than ten states. In one of those elections, we won one state and the District of Columbia as I remember. In ‘72, we won one state and the District of Columbia. In ‘68, we would have been beaten badly if Wallace had not been in the race. So we won in ‘92, we won in '96. The myth that we would not have won if Ross Perot hadn't been in there is simply not true; all the exit polls show just the reverse.

Al Gore didn't win by enough votes to stay out of the Supreme Court in 2000. That's what happened there. And you can argue what we should or shouldn't have done, but the truth is we had a plurality of 500,000 votes. And when John Kerry was defeated 51 to 48 in 2004, it was the smallest re-election margin for a president who got reelected since Woodrow Wilson in 1916, before World War I, so the idea that progressive politics is dead is wrong.

Now, what do we have to do to win? And I know there is some debate about whether it is about economics or security. The truth is it's about both. Don't think about how politicians or journalists write and talk about politics; think about how people live politics. Think about how people experience reality. If we want to win again, I think we have to do four things.

Number one, we got to be credible on security. Number two, we've got to have good ideas on economic and social policy. Not just to be against the Republicans, but say what we would be for. You can win congressional races by just saying “no,” as Newt Gingrich proved in 1994. They just said “no” to me for two years. But when you win the White House you have to be for something because you are the leader of the band.

Number three, you have to have better tactics. It is impossible to describe to someone who has never been a part of it what it is like to have the right wing go after you and tell the world that you are just no good. Your values are no good, you won't stand up for America, you won't fight for anything, you don't believe in the family, and all that sort of stuff. But I don't blame them anymore for doing that, because it just keeps working. Ask yourself this: if you had a business that you were running and it brought you a $100 million a year and you never had to change your business plan, both the public and, worse, your opponents reacted like Pavlov's dog – totally predictably every time and said “Oh, how mean they are.” All you have to do is upgrade your – would you ever change your business plan? Of course you wouldn't.

People come up to me all the time and say, “When is this mean partisanship going to come to an end?” And I say, “When it doesn't work anymore. It will end when it doesn't work anymore.” You can't ask them to stop being mean with us because it works. They will stop being mean to us on a human, personal level when it doesn't work anymore and not until then. And with their base, they never pay any price and it doesn't matter whether what they say is true or not.

And you had two Catholic Bishops campaigning against Tom Daschle in 2004 telling people you couldn't be a good Catholic and vote against him because he was a pro-choice Catholic Democrat when in fact for seven years Tom Daschle had tried to pass a bill imposing Roe v. Wade's ban on third-trimester abortions except for the life or health of the mother was in danger on all 50 states. It doesn't apply in about 10 states today where about 40 percent of the abortions are performed. It would have eliminated far more abortions than the so-called Partial-Birth Abortion bill, which, as another court just said, is manifestly unconstitutional. And we never got a vote on it in seven years. Why? Because the Republicans did not want the Democrats to be able to vote on anything that looked like it was a pro-life bill, but if the voters of South Dakota didn't know that, they can't be blamed. You have to advertise that.

You can't blame your opponents for applying a strategy that beats your brains out with regularity. They are in business to beat us. We believe in shared opportunity; they believe that if you concentrate enough wealth and power in the hands of the right people you will have economic success, national strength, and a culturally conservative country that will be good for everybody. That's what they believe, so they want to concentrate that. And if you want to beat it, you've got to be tough enough to beat it and that means you can't let people maul you.

I will never forget Saturday before the election. I had one of these guys who was on the swift boat with Senator Kerry at a rally with me in Little Rock and he was a fine looking man. Boy, he looked like he could serve in the Navy today; I mean no fat, erect, crew cut. And he got tears in his eyes talking with me. He said, “Mr. President,” he said, “what kind of country do I live in where people who never served in Vietnam can be behind a campaign to malign John Kerry?” He said, “He saved my life not once but twice.” He said, “How do they get away with these lies?” And, you know, it was Saturday before the election. It was too late. I didn't have the heart to tell him that most – a lot of what do you don't remember anything about Vietnam and you have no way of knowing whether those charges are true or not. You've got to answer this stuff.

Not only that, people really don't care if politicians attack each other with untrue stories. They figure if you don't want to get hurt, you shouldn't have filed for office. They figure whatever happens to us, our lives will be better than theirs. Half the time they like to see somebody hit us between the eyes with a two-by-four just to see how we react. In other words, to use one of my wife's phrases, the trick in politics is to take criticism seriously, but not personally. And if you take it personally, and you get feelings hurt, and you act like a deer caught in headlights, then you can't take it seriously. Again, always see these things from how it looks out there to real people and real voters. Never launch a personal attack, but if one gets lobbed at you, knock it out of the park. Most of these personal attacks are Brer Rabbit things, don't throw me in that brier patch. If you know how to answer it, you can hurt them worse than they intended to hurt you. But you have got to have good tactics.

And the fourth thing I want to say is we have to talk to so-called red America. This is the nuttiest thing I ever saw to believe that sometimes we have the political consultants say, “Okay, here are ten issues in the election and people agree with us on healthcare, education, the deficit, whether the tax cuts on wealthy people like Bill Clinton should be repealed.” And they don't agree with us on taxes on middle-class people. They think the Republicans are better on that and they think they are stronger on defense and we get a draw on crime and abortion is just explosive and while we have a slight advantage, there is great intensity on the other side, so for God's sake don't talk about it. So you analyze this and say, now, according to this poll we should talk about what they agree with us on and we will have some sort of answer on what we are losing on and we just try not to touch anything else, and we go where the votes are and dig them up. Nobody with any sense does that because that's not how people are. We are all a little red and a little blue, as Barack Obama said in his speech.

I even saw a decision in the Supreme Court the other day, the first time in my life I think since they've been on there, where I agreed with the dissent filed by Scalia and Thomas. I never thought it would happen. I wouldn't make that old lady in Norwalk sell her house. She'd been in it since she was 76 or 80 years old. I thought it was wrong. Maybe I'm wrong, but the point is we are complicated. Life is complicated and we're the progressives: we don't believe we have a monopoly on the truth, so it's nuts for us not to talk to so-called red America. And besides, that there are too many of them out there.

If you look at Ohio, a place where we won in ‘92 and ‘96, no Republican has ever been elected president without winning Ohio – ever. Senator Kerry ran way better than I did in Cleveland, but towns that I lost six to four, we lost four to one this time. I went after them. At my library dedication, which was very wet if you saw it, the last event was a woman singing The Battle Hymn of the Republic, and wet as it was she had a beautiful voice. We had been friends, that lady and I, for almost 30 years. She is the daughter of the man who ran the Pentecostal Church in my home state. He is a great friend of mine. I just talked to him the other day when his wife passed away. Her husband is one of the best friends I have got. He runs the biggest Pentecostal Church in Louisiana. Now, you wouldn't think that a Democrat who had been derided as liberal, defamed as having no conviction, and is the world's most famous sinner would have a friendship like that. This guy is my friend and we met on a very human level. Our children grew up at the same time; we've talked to one another about it. It never occurred to me that we shouldn't be friends because of our politics.

So after the ceremony, we all went back, we were dripping wet, and we went back to the apartment at the library. And I had all the participants from the event plus all the Presidents and Former Presidents and their spouses and everybody up there. So the pastor comes up to me – he is from North Louisiana, he said, “I have got a confession to make.” I said, “This is great. I'll live on this for the rest of my life: you confessing to me.” {LAUGHTER} I said, “What is it?” He said, “I voted for Bush.” I said, “Anthony, do you believe he was a good president?” He said, “I have very mixed feelings.” He said, “I have got mixed feelings about this Iraq thing. I hate those tax cuts. I don't like the deficits. I think kicking all these poor kids out of after school programs is outrageous.” This guy had a very sophisticated understanding of what had happened.

I said, “Well, did you vote for him over the cultural issues – social issues?” He said, “No.” He said, “You know, I'm a Pentecostal preacher. I'm pro-life and anti-gay marriage.” But he said, “I voted for you twice. I'd vote for Hillary. I love her.” And he said, “I think I'm the only Pentecostal Minister in the South ever to stand up and endorse the Employment Nondiscrimination Act.” I said, “You did that?” He said, “I did.” I said, “Why did you do that?” And he smiled and he said, “Because you've been talking to me about this for 20 years and I finally realized I couldn't treat gay people as subhuman anymore; that they're – if somebody is a good person and they obey the law, they've got to make the right to make a living and be treated decently in this society.” I said, “Well, Anthony, why did you vote for President Bush?” {LAUGHTER} And he said – listen to this – every one of you listen to this. He said, “Because ever since you left, nobody in your party talks to us anymore.” He said, “Bill, you can't vote for somebody who doesn't talk to you.”

Now, you think about that. And he said a really smart thing. He said, “Look, you can't get James Dobson and Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson.” And he said, “You shouldn't, because they are not for you. You know, you shouldn't. You guys don't see the world the same way and they are not for you.” But he said, “Most of us Evangelicals, we're just trying to raise our children and hold our families and our community together in a hostile and very difficult environment.” And he smiled and he said – this guy's a good politician – he said, “You don't need many of us to win.” So I went back and checked: in ‘96 among white Evangelical Protestants, Senator Dole beat me 63 to 37. In 2000, President Bush beat Vice President Gore, 74 to 26. In 2004, President Bush beat John Kerry, 78 to 21. Now, Kerry meanwhile, thanks to a lot of you, was doing much better in other places. The demographics of America have continued to move our way. We've had more young people organized and more people registered and more people are involved, but, you know, we can't pretend that people don't agree with us on most things aren't Americans and don't have a stake in our future, and that they are so different from us that none of them would have any interest in talking about. That's just not true.

When Stephanie was introducing me, I learned something. You know, I did – it's true, I did go to Rwanda and apologize. It's the biggest regret of my administration. We couldn't have save most of the people because it happened so fast, but we could have saved some. And at the time we were reeling from Somalia and trying to get into Bosnia, which had gotten a lot of publicity, and we were trying to get in there and the world just missed it. Most countries, including the United States, never even had high-level meetings considering whether to send people, so we have come a long way. In Bosnia and Kosovo, even in Darfur there is an effort being made now, and I have some thoughts about that if you want to talk about it.

But I thought about that. When I went to Rwanda, I met all these survivors of the genocide who were working to help the country get put back together. And I met a lady – a beautiful women who said that she awoke in a pool of her own blood to find her husband and six children lying dead around her. And she first was angry at God for letting her survive, and then she said, “I realized I must have been spared for a purpose and it could not be something as mean as vengeance, so I do what I can to help us start again.” They have reconciliation villages in Rwanda where the Hutus and the Tutsis get free land but only if they agree to live next door to one another. I went to a village called Ndera where there were two women neighbors holding hands: one of them lost her brother and husband in the genocide, the other's husband was in prison awaiting trial for a war crimes tribunal and, you've got to have done something really horrible to be called before the war crimes tribunal. They were neighbors. I met a Hutu women caring for two dying Tutsi boys who had a congenital disease, all living together.

Now, if they can do that, we can talk to red America. Give me a break here. And there is nothing wrong with that and there is no absence of conviction.

In the hills of North Central Africa, there are tribes who when they see each other walking on the paths and they greet each other, they have an important greeting. I want you all to remember this if you don't remember anything else I say. When you see somebody on the road and they say “Hello,” instead of saying “Hello” back or “How are you?” or “Have a nice day,” the response in English is “I see you.” Just think about that. When you walk out of here today, look around the convention center and see all these people working here, think of how many people you pass on the street every day you never see.

You want to know how we can win again? We have got to be strong. We've got to have good ideas. We've got to have good tactics. And there can be no person we do not see.

Thank you. 

{/speech}
