{title} Remarks at White House Conference on Culture and Diplomacy {/title}
{event} The East Room {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} November 28, 2000 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Well, thank you very much, and welcome. I want to, first of all, say how honored we are to have all of you here. This is a remarkable assemblage, and I want to thank Hillary and Secretary Albright and all the others who have worked so hard to put this meeting together today. And I thank those of you who have come from around America and from around the world to be here.

And I thank, especially, Senator Leahy and Republican Leach and the members of the diplomatic community who have come.

This is a topic that I care a lot about. I think I should begin by saying that Secretary Albright just spoke to you eloquently, wearing a bolo from the Navajo Nation. I was just not very long ago on a Navajo reservation in Northern New Mexico. But it represents a very distinctive and important part of America's culture, the first Americans.

This conference, I think, comes at a rather pivotal time in human history, because we all think we know what we mean when we talk about cultural diplomacy. You know, you send your artists to us, we send our musicians to you, we all make nice and everybody feels better. But the truth is that the world is also full of conflict. Indeed, I was seeing Mr. Lithgow out there and he may have thought that in the last two weeks he has returned to the third rock from the sun. {LAUGHTER}

Let me say what I mean by this. The end of the Cold War, bipolar world, and the emergence of a global information society have given rise to two apparently contradictory forces. And what we came here to talk about sort of falls in the middle.

First, you see, as we all get to find our own way at the end of the Cold War, the emergence of a huge number of different racial, religious, ethnic and tribal conflicts within and across national lines that might commonly be called "culture wars" -- if you use culture in a broader sense, and not just the sense that most of us use the word.

And, secondly, you see how, if they're having a crisis in Russia or an earthquake in China, immediately we all know about it, all around the world, because we live in a global information society and that means that our musicians, our artists, our movies -- particularly here in America, which has been an entertainment capital of the world -- go across the world rapidly and other countries worry about whether we're going to blur all the distinctions between our various cultures and render them meaningless so that they won't have independent power to inform, to enlighten, to enrich our own societies and those around the world. Now, these are not exactly new questions, but they are being felt with increasing force because of the end of the bipolar Cold War world and the emergence of the most globalized society the Earth has ever known.

You can put me, as usual, in the optimistic camp. I still believe that the role of culture in the sense that brings us here today will be fundamentally positive, because it will teach us to understand our differences and affirm our common humanity.

And that is, after all, the great trick in the world today. Since we don't have to draw a line in the dust and say, you're on one side or the other, the way we did for 40 years after the end of World War II, it is very important that we understand and appreciate our differences, and then recognize that, as important as they are, somehow we have to find a way to elevate our common humanity. That's where cultural diplomacy comes in.

And I have certainly benefitted from it in terms of my life as President, probably more than any person who ever held this office, in no small measure because of the time in which I was privileged to serve. But I can think of just in my lifetime a few examples that I might mention that I think are important.

I think it's not an exaggeration to say that Glen Miller and other American jazz bands had a pivotal effect on the morale of our European allies in World War II. I think it's probably not wrong to say that Elvis Presley did more to win the Cold War when his music was smuggled into the former Soviet Union than he did as a GI serving in Germany. {LAUGHTER}

I think it's worth noting that on the morning of Poland's first free election in 1989, voters woke up to find their whole country plastered with posters of my favorite movie, depicting Gary Cooper in "High Noon," with a Solidarity pin where his sheriff's badge should have been. {LAUGHTER} And the gun in his holster airbrushed out. One look and the people knew that the time had come to stand for freedom, nonviolently.

When I was on my state visit to the Czech Republic, Vaclav Havel took me to the jazz club where he used to gather and plot the Velvet Revolution. And I played with some of the Czech musicians who had been allies of his in that great struggle.

A few years ago in Bosnia we needed to find a way to teach children how to avoid land mines. So we choose the universal medium of Superman comics. During the darkest days of that war, when books were burned and libraries were shelled, American artists, authors and performers like the conductor Charles Ansbacher, who is in our audience, traveled to Sarajevo to show their Bosnian colleagues that they were not forgotten.

Even then, cultural diplomacy was a giant step ahead of traditional diplomacy. In 1992, when the time finally came that we could reach out a democratic South Africa, our path there was forged by the Dance Theater of Harlem.

So cultural diplomacy does have the power to penetrate our common humanity. And I say that not just in terms of the stars, but in terms of the way people generally feel. And I was recently on our trip to Nigeria; the First Lady of Nigeria dragged me out on to the dance floor to dance to Nigerian music. And when I was in India, I went to a little village in Rajasthan, Nilah, and the village women got me in the middle of their dancing and they showered me with thousands of petals of flowers. And I understood, in a way that I never could have read from a book, how they related to the world and what role music and the arts had in their lives.

So, I think this is very important. I also don't buy the fact that the fact that we know more about each other's culture means that we're all going to be diluted. I think that American culture has been enriched by the rest of the world, and hopefully we've been a positive force on the rest of the world.

In our country, we have the architecture of I.M. Pei, or the plays of David Wong, who is with us today, and who reminds us that American art, in many ways, is the art of the rest of the world.

Dr. Saman Sang and his wife, Chan Mulachan, have also joined us today. They escaped from Cambodia during the reign of the Khmer Rouge and brought to America the gift of Cambodian court dance. It was threatened in the land of its birth and it is now part of our culture, as well. With the support of foundations like Rockefeller, Ford and the NEA, they are now returning home to introduce a new generation of Cambodians to their old culture.

I say this to point out that our country really does benefit from this sort of cultural interchange, and I think we can benefit others if, from time to time, we provide a safe haven for cultural preservation. I think this is more important now than it was in the past because of the way the world works, as I have said. I know there are some people who believe that our culture has become too pervasive in the rest of the world. I've encountered this anxiety in every part of the world, from people who don't share our political system's views to those who just worry about the trade impact of American movies or records or Cds.

Many people are absolutely sure that because of globalization, pretty soon their children will be speaking American English, every television will be tuned to MTV and every French movie will have a happy ending. {LAUGHTER}

And in some parts of the world, these kind of fears have fueled a lot of bitterness about the process of globalization. But we can't turn this globalization off -- you know, people want to know more about each other. And now they have the means to do it. The Internet is the most powerful means of communication in all of human history.

And I think that globalization, in the end, will be a force for diversity, not uniformity. A week ago I was in Vietnam, where many people are wondering how to open their doors while protecting their traditions. I pointed out that globalization is not just bringing the world into Vietnam, but it is also bringing Vietnam to the rest of the world.

Films about life in Vietnam are winning awards over the globe. Paintings by Vietnamese artists command fortunes at international art shows. Fortunately, we were able to find some wonderful ones in Vietnam that don't yet require a fortune to buy. {LAUGHTER} Old Vietnamese poems are published in America in English, Vietnamese, and in an ancient script that never before has come off a printing press.

Consider the Nobel Prize in Literature, for those who think the world is becoming homogenized. Of the first 80 prizes given out after 1900, only five went to authors outside Europe and North America. Seven of the last 20 prizes have gone to Asian, Latin American and African authors, including our panelist, Wole Soyinka, not simply because the good people of the Nobel Committee are trying to cast a wider net, but because we actually do know more about one another than ever before.

And what about this business about language being homogenized? Well, if you get on the Internet, you will find people all over the world chatting in Welsh, downloading fonts in Bengali, ordering courses in intensive Cherokee. With advances in translation and voice recognition technology, before long it will be possible for people to communicate instantaneously on the Internet or even on the telephone in their own languages. Thanks to the Internet, people with similar interests and outlooks can now be dispersed around the world, and still form a community.

I tell somebody all the time, I've got a cousin in Arkansas who regularly plays chess with a man in Australia. I don't know how they work out the time change, but this is the kind of thing that is happening. And it will open the avenues for more cultural, even subcultural diplomacy.

Now, we have some obligations here. We have to do more to close the digital divide so that the poor of the world can participate more readily in this sort of cultural interchange. And we are working very hard on that. We also have to work hard in America to make sure that our contributions reflect the diversity of our culture. We have supported public-private partnerships in recent years, for example, that have sent Andy Warhol exhibits to the Hermitage in St. Petersburg, Navajo textiles to Latin America and the art exchange between regional museums in America and France that Elizabeth Rowatan has recently organized.

And I do want to support the legislation that has been introduced by Representative Leach who is here and Senator Biden, to create an endowment to support State Department cultural exchange programs on top of the funds we're already providing. This will become more and more important.

So I've already said more than I meant to, but I care a lot about this subject. I think you should see this for what it is. It's an opportunity for us to learn more about each other, to understand each other better, to reaffirm our common humanity, and in so doing, not to blur the cultural lines, but to highlight them in a way that promote peace and reconciliation, and therefore put a real roadblock in the path of those who would like a 21st Century dominated by culture wars, instead of cultural celebrations.

Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE}

Hillary has to go, and we're giving her a cultural excused absence. She's going to sign copies of her new book. {LAUGHTER} 

{/speech}
