{title} Transcript of President Clinton's Remarks to UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) Humanitarian Segment, Panel “Lessons Learned From the Response to the Indian Ocean” {/title}
{event} UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) Humanitarian Segment, Panel “Lessons Learned From the Response to the Indian Ocean” {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} July 14, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr. President, Mr. Vice President, Officers and Members of ECOSOC, Mr. Under-Secretary General, Ladies and Gentlemen.

I am honored to be given the opportunity to address you today and I have been honored to serve as the Secretary General's Special Envoy for Tsunami Recovery, a job I intend to continue for at least two years and perhaps longer depending upon how long the work takes. I look forward to our dialogue today and will try to abbreviate my remarks so we can spend more time in conversation.

For the last five months, I have worked on trying to do what the Secretary-General
asked me to do to – make sure we had a more coordinated, well organized, more transparent process in the recovery phase; in the long term reconstruction phase, to make sure we have a uniform system of reporting and monitoring our progress; to try to make sure we came up with a prevention and risk reduction strategy and better emergency management procedures; and that we left this endeavor with a set of best practices which could be used by other countries facing similar problems in the future.

Of course we all use the mantra – build back better – we wanted to build back better. I want to say a few words about that. About where it is obvious and easy and where it is difficult and uncertain. I have met both in the region and here in NY and in Europe with affected government officials NGOs, UN agencies, corporate leaders and ordinary citizens who care about these issues. Recently we convened here in NY a Global Consortium consisting of the largest multilateral and NGO contributors to tsunami relief and representatives of the affected countries with a common commitment to improve our coordination or financial tracking and communications and to have a uniform system to measure progress about which I will say more in a minute.

I have very much enjoyed the opportunity I have had to listen to the representatives of the countries, NGOs, and others about the ongoing operational challenges. These five months have confirmed my belief in the inherent value of the United Nations, the glue that makes international cooperation possible and I want to thank, as I have on previous occasions, Jan Egeland and Margareta Wahlstrom for the marvelous job they have done in coordinating work. You should know, in my opinion at least, that in each country the UN teams bringing together all the agencies are doing a good job and working hard to support the work of the governments and implementing their own plans. But I believe we need to move forward quickly on a global risk reduction agenda and to improve the systems and policies for disasters before they hit as well as to help accelerate the pace of the recovery in the affected countries.

Let me just try to be as specific as I can. First of all on the need for disaster prevention and mitigation. While much of the physical destruction in this massive tsunami was unavoidable clearly the human toll would have been lower if there had been adequate early warning and other prevention strategies had been in place. From Banda Aceh we have evidence of building codes, for example, as many reinforced concrete buildings remained intact, while others were swept away. Vegetation buffers appear to have made a significant difference in both Indonesia and in Sri Lanka where mangroves in particular seem to have diluted the impact of waves on the coastline. Preparedness is likely to have been a key factor in contrasting human tolls in the coastal Indian communities in the Cuddalore district of Tamil Nadu, between some villages that had recently undertaken training exercises under UN Development Program sponsored efforts and others that had not. And of course most of us have now heard about the enterprising British School girl, Tilly Smith, who had learned about tsunamis in her class a few weeks before going on holiday in Thailand, recognized the warning signs and saved reportedly a hundred people who were on the beach. If early warning had made a difference in Thailand 310 miles from the epicenter, it is also clear, that we could have done better in Somalia almost 3,000 miles from the epicenter.

Less than a month after the tsunami struck, 168 countries gathered to draw up the Hyogo Framework for Action, continuing the work started in 1994 at the Yokohama disaster reduction conference. This Hyogo Framework sets out strategic goals, priorities for action, and agreed steps for implementation for governments and other stakeholders. I have only one point to make about this. We cannot let this year pass without some real progress on disaster risk reduction. So I owe it the members of this council to systematically implement the Hyogo Plan of Action and specifically to include disaster risk reduction policies and practices in the recovery efforts so as not to reinstate the old vulnerabilities, to institute disaster risk awareness education in school curricula, to support local programs to assess risk, raise awareness of vulnerability and to close the gaps in capacity necessary to address those risks and to complete the early warning systems on a sound and sustainable technical footing well integrated with other warning systems such as those for tropical cyclones. 2005 is a key year for the risk reduction agenda. I have complete confidence that we will never have the tourist economies that were devastated in the Maldives and the coast of Thailand fully recovered until not only each country has a early warning system but there is an integrated south Asian coordinated early warning system that encompasses all these nations. I actually believe that because of the visibility they acquired, there is an enormous potential for increased tourism in Sri Lanka and Indonesia for example as a result of what has happened. None of it will happen unless we have a good early warning system and it all works together. The countries have been quite good about agreeing to work together and set up compatible technologies but we need to finish, everybody has said the right things but it is very, very important to get this done and to do it now.

I would like to say a couple of words about emergency response. The immediate and unprecedented humanitarian response was wonderful. Politics and bureaucracy were sidelined, everybody worked together, but now we are in the most difficult part. The recovery is much, much more complex and frustrating. Everybody wants to be in a decent temporary shelter, lot of people are still living in tents. Some people are living in temporary shelter in very hot temperatures that have tin roofs or sidings. It is a major problem. In Aceh and Sri Lanka some 170,000 people are still living in tents, the governments are moving quickly, but we know it takes a long time to build permanent shelters for everyone. We have in the United States, people from our last hurricane who haven't been permanently sheltered yet. So this is a big issue. There are sufficient resources available to build satisfactory semi-permanent shelters. So I urge all of you to do whatever you can to ensure that whatever continuing lack of coordination and politics disputes exist on this issue don't hamper the efforts of people to have decent shelter now.

On my last trip to the region the number one frustration I found was in people who felt that they were living under more or less unbearable conditions. Finally I am concerned that we are not applying our knowledge and expertise of emergency response during the recovery phase and let me say what I mean by that. There aren't established protocols in many places, for example, for deploying vocational trainers or putting in place project and financial tracking systems just for this phase covering the medium to longer term work. We know these needs will arise, so again, I urge the council to support institutional agreements and pre-positioning in preparedness for the recovery dimension of what we are doing.

Now let me talk a little bit about where things stand in the early months of this recovery. There is, as I said, impatience, there is some understandable exhaustion, there are some growing pains where new agencies have been created. But I believe we are making a good beginning. Even though it may not be apparent to people who are still frustrated with their living conditions or whose livelihoods have not been restored. We are beginning to get a good institutional coordinating and financing framework in place. We have to worry about losing momentum.

But let's start with the good news. I applaud Indonesia and Sri Lanka's decisions to create dedicated recovery institutions, empowered to make the right decisions and the leaders selected are able and off to a good start. They have direct reporting lines to their chief executives which is good. And we can already see the benefits in some of these areas. For example when I was last in Aceh, the BRR Director Mr. Kuntoro had just let out for bid some 700 million dollars in construction projects, 500 million of it to be funded by NGO contributions by ordinary people all around the world. The countries have completed comprehensive needs assessments which give us a guide post of what needs to be done and with the single exception of the Maldives, sufficient funds have been promised or secured to meet the needs in the countries that were hardest hit. Some of the affected countries are making substantial investments on their own. India and Indonesia will provide more than a billion dollars toward their recovery and we know that other nations are contributing as well.

We do need a concerted effort to assist the Maldives in closing its funding gap. It's the only one where we have a real shortfall now. It's 100 to 200 million dollars and I believe there is one step that this council can take which I would like to ask to consider. The Maldives was recently graduated from Least Developed Country status, a process initiated by a General Assembly decision two days before the tsunami hit. Then the tsunami hit and they lost 62 percent of their annual GDP, which is heavily concentrated in fishing and tourism. I would like to see their graduation delayed only until, I think you made the right decision to graduate them, we have to have a graduation process. But I think that their graduation should be delayed until their income recovers to where it was when that was the basis for their graduation. In other words the basis for their graduation no longer exists and I have already told you and I have done a lot work on this we are having real difficulties getting the tourists back to Thailand, to the Maldives all these places and every time I go over there I'd make a big plea to people to please go back but we don't have the early warning systems up, people are still scared, we've got to hammer this home. Thailand has its up, but we don't have the regions up. So I would like to ask your consideration for delaying their graduation only for the period of time necessary for them to be restored to the per capita income they had which caused them to be graduated in the first place and I think that is something very specific that you could do.

Now let me say, I am quite excited and this is something I urge you all to check on yourselves to see if my excitement is justified, but we set up a Global Consortium mechanism to establish a simple common tracking system for the funds. It is now in place for the Maldives, Sri Lanka and Thailand. It's anchored in the UN's Donor Assistance Database model. And we have just made a presentation of it to Mr. Kuntoro in Indonsia and I think they will be participating. This is a great system. You can get on the system now and we get it all set up and published and you can find out, you can go to any country to any part of the country, to any topic area that needs to be addressed and you can see what the plan is, how much it costs, what the timeline is and whether someone has pledged funds for this particular project or not. It is a very good common way of us to be able to monitor what is happening in tsunami relief and I hope it will work as a model for what can used in similar projects in the future.

I also think there has been real progress in the effort to make the recovery for of a bottom-up process. India's district level NGO resource center, the Aceh Reconstruction agency community facilitators now working in 2000 of the 4000 communities affected. Sri Lanka's brave agreement this month to establish a Joint Implementation Mechanism.

I must say, you know I make it a practice to stay out of the politics of other countries, actually I make it a practice to stay out of the politics of my own country now. {LAUGHTER} But the President of Sri Lanka lost her father and her husband to political violence, was herself shot and blinded and it grieves to see her criticized for her willingness to set aside her personal losses in search of reconciliation and a successful shared future for the people of Sri Lanka. I think we should all support that. You know, sooner or later, I have learned in life that if you cannot kill jail or occupy all of your adversaries. {LAUGHTER} You have to make a deal. That is where politics comes in, that is why we are all sitting here in this room. Look at all the differences we have all had, so I ask you for your support for her. You think about it, it's always amazing to me. In country after country after country, Rwanda, South Africa, now in Colombia the victims of political violence are often the ones most willing to reach out the hand of reconciliation having paid so much. This is important. So anyways, I think we are doing pretty well with that.

I think that anti-corruption measures are being vigorously embraced. I cannot tell you there has been no corruption. I cannot tell you none of this money has been wasted. I can tell you that this is the most serious effort I have ever seen the affected countries to be fully accountable for this money. And we have been blessed to get pro bono services from Deloitte and Price Waterhouse Coopers to do forensic auditing. The countries involved have separate and independent auditing systems. The Aceh Reconstruction Agency has an integrity pact with each of their partners. There are lots of things being done here to try to track this money. And again, the very reporting system we have, when we get it up and going will enable any member of the press anywhere in the world to get on the internet on any day and see what is happening with this money and then check on it. So I would say that of all the things that I have ever been involved in like this, this is the best effort that I have ever seen to try and be accountable but we'll have to continue to work on it.

What do we need to do now. First we need to execute the plan of action in every country. And that requires a continuing effort to clarify who is going to what, where and when and to resolve whatever local disputes still exist. The Sri Lankans for example have resolved some of the disputes but not all about how far back from the coastline construction then be held. In Aceh they have a terrible dilemma where the Government of Indonesia is committed to try to preserve their forest resources and to harvest them in a sustainable manner. The cutting is already about three times what the government says is fully sustainable and they need a lot of wood. So the rest of us are going to have to help them to import the wood at an affordable price where they are not gauged and they don't have to tear down their rainforest. We have to support that. This is, I think, quite important and there are lots and lots of issues like that.

Secondly there are significant capacity constraints beyond the environmental ones. And I think donor will respond positively from requests on this but we have to be sensitive about it. In Aceh for example, 70 percent of the government buildings were destroyed. 2500 teachers and assistants were lost. Sri Lanka needs enough skills and labor to rebuild 100,000 houses, when before the tsunami struck, it never built more than 5,000 a year. Now all these things are opportunities. I want to see when this is over, Sri Lanka and Aceh have a sustainable home building industry with people trained in business to have a sector of the economy that didn't exist before. But still it is challenging to do. We have to build this capacity up quickly. There are still some unresolved government policies that will slow recovery I mentioned the coastal zoning question in Sri Lanka and the Timber resource issue in Aceh. There are also land issues in India identifying and paying for alternative settlement sites. And the question of which NGOs are where doing what.

The BRR in Indonesia has a new one stop shop for NGO visa's but I think that's very important and the other issue that has been raised repeatedly to me is the application of import duties and taxes in Sri Lanka to foreign remittances and equipment being brought in by NGOs. So these are things that have to be worked through. But we are trying.

Let me just say a couple of words about building back better. It's obvious that we at least know how to build back better houses schools and health facilities. We know how to build back better disaster prevention and mitigation, it is just a question of doing it. The real challenge is building back a better capacity for economic diversification and growth. A lot of the places that were destroyed were relatively isolated small fishing villages where it is not self evident how you would diversify and upgrade the economy. Now the best thing we need to do is to realize that we don't want the UN to have a five year plan like the old Soviet Union here. We have got to let people decide how they are going to build their economy back but the most impressive work really quick work I saw being done was in India, in Tamil Nadu, where local NGOs went in and established production cooperatives with women who were widows of fishermen or who themselves had been fishing and had lost their boats and they were in the process of producing products which were being sold locally which I am now trying to help them sell here in the United States as well. But people at home will figure out how to diversify and build their economy better if there is enough micro credit and other systematic support. And the most exciting thing being done in this regard is in Indonesia in Aceh where the World Bank has come up with 30 million dollars to do a land titling project, because a lot of the records that did exist in the cities were destroyed and a lot of the people in the villages never had titles to their land.

Those of you familiar with the work of Mr. de Soto around the world and similar projects know that the world's poor people have roughly 5 trillion dollars in assets that are totally unusable for economic growth because they don't have title to them so they can't get credit using what they own as collateral. This is going to be done through the World Bank grant in Aceh. It is very forward thinking on both the part of the World Bank and Indonesia but I hope that the other countries affected will do that and in its pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals, I hope that you, Mr. President and ECOSOC, can have an influence in urging this sort of project to be done in other countries outside the tsunami affected areas. When it was done in Peru, when Mr. de Soto was Finance Minister, they had three years in a row of double digit growth before the political problems of the Fujimori Government took over. So it's big deal, it's going to happen in Aceh and I want it to be done everywhere else in the region and I'd like to see it done every country in the world where it would be helpful.

Finally let me say that I am well aware that the job I took I think I originally got because the Secretary-General assumed that this would be like every other disaster where governments would promise 90 percent of the money and only deliver about half of what they promised. And Kofi Annan is a very busy person so he looked around the world and he said who is the best person I know at making people feel guilty if they don't give money. How about Bill Clinton, he doesn't have a job anymore. {LAUGHTER}

That's really what happened I think. And this turned out to be a very different job.
The NGOs still have over two billion dollars in the bank, dedicated gifts from ordinary people all across the globe to spend on tsunami relief. It turned out that the problem was not, it may when we get to long term reconstruction we may need some more government money and I may have to do what the Secretary-General once thought I would do. But right now what we are trying to do is to spend the money we have and to do it in an honest, open, effective, coordinated way, in a way that enables the areas and the human beings involved to recover. And it's been immensely rewarding.

I don't control any money and I have a hearty band of little detainees, I call them, from the other UN agencies. I have detained them in my office to work with me and I'm grateful to them. And I'm very grateful to my former Chief of Staff at the White House, Erskine Bowles, who is leaving me today but who has been working with me for the first six months of this endeavor. We don't really have any power but I feel like my job is what Harry Truman once described the Presidency to be. He said being President of the United States was largely a matter of trying to convince people to do what they should have done without you asking them in the first place. That's about all I can do here. But I think we're making some real progress. And these people deserve our support.

My last stop on the last tour was in Aceh in a displaced persons camp. And in every one of these little camps they have to select someone to be the leader of the camp to represent them. You know, they escort people like me around to hear the complaints of the citizens. So I met the first man and he introduced me to his wife and he introduced me to his son. And I told the young Indonesian woman who was my interpreter; I said I believe that boy is the most beautiful child I have ever seen in my life. And the young girl smiled at me and she said “Yes, he is very beautiful. And before the tsunami he had nine brothers and sisters and they're all gone.” The point of that is this man and his wife had a smile on their face that day. They took me through the camp. And at the last stop at the maternal health clinic the woman who had lost nine of her own children brought me the youngest resident of the camp, a two day old baby, and asked me to name the child. She said “In our culture, the mother cannot get out of bed for 40 days.” Now, every time I say that I think it's going to spread to America and shut down the economy {LAUGHTER} but she said, she said “in our culture the woman cannot get out of bed for 40 days and then she gets up and we name the child. So she asked me to bring you the child and ask you to name him.” And I said “Is there an Indonesian word for new beginning?” and she said “Yes, it's Dawn, the beginning of a new day and she said in our language it's a boy's name not a girl's name so we're going to name this boy Dawn.” But the point I want to make is that this woman had smile on her face as she was holding this baby after having lost nine of her ten children.

These people deserve our best efforts. And I'm very impressed with what their governments are doing, it's been truly heroic. Very impressed with the NGOs, very impressed with the level of coordination. But if you can have a big role in coordination, you can do that specific thing for the Maldives and I hope you will stay with us all the way through. They are very worthy people out there, just like you and me they just didn't get a chance to get a good education and wind up working with the UN. So they because were fishing along the coastal village when all the furry of hell broke loose on them one day. We need to help them begin again.

Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
