{title} President Clinton Addresses the Jingji Real Estate Group {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} May 23, 2002 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much, Sam. Mayor Yoo, thank you for your welcome and your very impressive review of the progress of your community, Chim-pwah(?), thank you for your remarks; and Ronyan(?), thank you for managing this event so well. It's a great pleasure for me to be here today. I have come with a number of people and two of them, they now work in Asia. They're members from my White House Staff, Maria Haley, a native of the Philippines, who works for the company headed by Henry Kissinger and Mack McLarty and Nancy Bowen, who actually commanded my Oval Office operation for 8 years, when I was President. She now lives in Hong Kong and works with her cousin. I appreciate their coming. {APPLAUSE}

Let me say, I am delighted to be back in China and when I flew in today, I was reliving the trip I took here as President, four years ago. It was wonderful for me. I had the opportunity to talk directly to the people of China on television, to see the remarkable progress here. I even went to a church in Beijing. I spoke to young students at Beijing University. I got to see some of the wonderful sights in Chion and Boilin(?). In Shanghai, I even got to answer citizens' questions on a radio call-in show with the Mayor. Mr. Mayor, you might be interested to know, when I was in Shanghai, most of the callers were much more interested in talking to the Mayor about traffic problems than with the President of the United States, {COMMENT="He laughs} which may be some indication of the importance of economics in a modern world.

Since I left office, I have had the privilege to come back to China a couple of times. I'm always amazed by the physical changes occurring here and they are reflective of the people in this room and their efforts. I'd like to make a special note of Shenzhen's successes with JingJi Real Estate. It's amazing to me to see how far China has come in such a short time. I also want to say how much I appreciate the work that JingJi has done in corporate citizenship through the China Health Fund and other charitable organizations. I think as China grows economically and you have more and more of these social changes, they cannot be entirely managed by government alone. It will be more and more important for people in their private business capacities to try do things to help deal with the social challenges of their communities, so I thank you, sir, for that.

Let me say, when I was President, I thought my major jobs were two. One, to do a good job for the American people. Our economy was in trouble and our society was divided when I took office and I tried to make the American people understand that if we could recover our economic growth and make our society more just at the same time and that I think we largely succeeded.

The second thing I tried to do was to make American a leading force for building the kind of 21st Century world I believe we always want, a world of peace and security, of freedom and prosperity. I couldn't imagine how we could build that kind of a world unless the United States had a constructive relationship with China, the world's largest nation and oldest civilization, and unless the United States was heavily involved in trying to build the right kind of future for Asia, involving also our traditional allies of Japan, South Korea, the Philippines, Thailand, Australia, New Zealand and nations in the Indian South Continent.

At the very beginning of my administration, we established (for the first time) an annual meeting of the leaders of the Asian-Pacific region around the APEC Conference. We made a commitment to free trade in the Asian-Pacific area by 2020. We established a regional quorum on security with the OSION(?) nations. We made an aggressive effort to minimize the financial crisis in Acion(?) in the late 1990's. We normalized relations with Vietnam and signed an important trade agreement with them. We restored good ties between United States and India for the first time in 40 years; and in partnership with South Korea, we worked to end North Korea's nuclear program, it's missile testing program and I hope soon we will end its missile program as well.

We worked with our allies in Australia and other countries to bring peace and dignity to East Timor. I recently was honored to represent President Bush in Independence Day for East Timor just a couple of days ago, on May the 20th. We worked with Cambodia to reduce the horrible problem with landmine deaths and injuries; with Singapore, to start bilateral trade negotiations; with Japan on a host of economic and security issues; and of course, with Indonesia to deal with the impact of financial and political crisis there. But the most important work we did for the long run was with China, permanent normal trade relations, our agricultural agreement, our _______ project, our cooperation to the United Nations and other forums and, of course, the WTO Agreement.

The basic idea behind this is that the United States and China must build a future of cooperation, not conflict. The U.S. should speed China's immigration into the world, not contain its influence. The wizard of this course is reflected in the transformation right here in Shenzhen. The Mayor talked about it, the astonishing transformation over the last two decades of a largely agricultural area in an industrial area with a lot of high tech industries, an enormous number of foreign companies and foreign investments from more than 40 nations.

The question we face today is how to make the most of this and how to deal with the problems that are clearly facing China and the rest of the world. So let me begin with what I think is the big question the world must deal with today. What do the positive developments here in this city and in China generally, the WTO, Shanghai and all the other things that are going on? And on the other hand, the current problems of the world: what happened in America on September the 11th, the turmoil in the Middle East, the AIDS epidemic, the threat of climate change. What do these good things and these bad things tell us about the world in which we live?

They tell us, first of all, that for good or ill, it is an interdependent world. We live in a world where we have torn down barriers, collapsed distances and spread information and technology. Now if you're here in this beautiful hotel, in this beautiful ballroom, listening to the Mayor's account of its success, we celebrate the benefits of that interdependent world. But on September the 11th, people with a very different set of values and objectives used open waters, easy travel, access to technology and information to murder 3,100 people in the United States, who themselves came from 70 different nations and they were in our country seeking the benefits of the interdependent world.

So what do the good things and the bad things tell us? We live in a world that is interdependent but not fully integrated. We therefore reap both the benefits and are exposed to the dangers of a world without walls. The great challenge for all of us is to move from interdependence to an integrated global community, one in which we can claim the benefits of our openness and dramatically reduce the burdens and the dangers. That is what we face today.

I think, on balance, in spite of all the trouble in the headlines, we should be quite hopeful. The world has after all been working at this for only about 50 years, since the establishment of the United Nations in 1945, the establishment of global trading system in international financial institutions after the war and it has only been actually possible to do since China made the decision a couple of decades ago to move toward openness and integration with global economy and then in 1989 the Berlin Wall fell with triumph with new markets and freedom in the foreign economies over in Europe. So we haven't had a lot of time against the whole background of human history to build an integrated global economy and an awful lot of good things have happened.

The great adversaries of World War II are now cooperating. The great adversaries of the cold war are now cooperating. The United Nations is doing more than ever before. East Timor is largely a tribute to its success. We find ways to reach across cultural divides for common objectives. China supported the United States in the U.N., for example, in our efforts to end ethnic cleansing and build a free society in the Balkans that could be part of the united Europe. The European union is becoming more integrated economically and politically. I think, on balance, that's a good thing.

In the years when I was President, I tried to speed all this process toward integration. In our region and Latin America, we adopted a North America Free Trade Agreement and committed ourselves to a free trade area in the Americas. We fought Narco Traffickers and terrorists and helped to deal with financial crises in Mexico and elsewhere. In Europe, as I said, we supported the European union, peace in the Balkans, peace in Northern Ireland and the integration of Turkey into Europe, which is a big thing for the future of the world economy.

In Africa, we opened our markets to African countries wider than ever before and established partnerships to help them deal with the terror associated with tribal conflicts. In the Middle East, we signed a peace agreement with Jordan, supported Egypt and tried with a lot of success for most of the time I was President, to advance the cause of peace. In Asia, we did all the things I said, but I think the most important of them all was the entry of China into the World Trade Organization.

Globally, the years in which I served as President saw a lot of progress toward building an integrated world. We brought the WTO into existence, a huge achievement. The Kyoto protocol defining global warming was drafted and approved by governments. We agreed to a comprehensive test ban treaty, established an international criminal accord, saw the worldwide adoption of the treaty against childhood labor and saw, in 2000, an amazing initiative to forgive the debt of the poorest countries in the world but only if they would put all the savings into the education and healthcare of their people and the development of their economy.

Outside of the things the government did, the world was being brought together by two of the great factors of historic significance. The first is the information technology revolution. When I became President, in January of ‘93, there were only 50 sites on the worldwide web, 50. It was still largely the private providence of research physicists. When I left office, there were 350 million sites on the worldwide web and there are many, many more today. There's never been anything like this in the history of the world.

The other thing that happened is that an international consortium of scientists began to find out things about our world which will change the future forever and largely for the better. Internationally, scientists established, I think beyond any doubt, that the phenomenon of global warming is real, and that if the planet warms for the next 50 years at the rate of the last 10, we're going to have massive numbers of refugees because whole areas of the world won't be able to grow food. In your region, whole island nations in the Pacific will flood. In my country, we'll lose 50 feet of Manhattan Island in New York, among other things, something that's close to me because I live there and my wife works in New York at the Senate. But we know that now, because of global efforts by scientists.

Because of global efforts by scientists, we've discovered new life forms in the deepest oceans and river bottoms, and most importantly, a global consortium sequenced the human genome. And in all that, we've identified the major genetic variances that cause breast cancer in women. We were very close to the discovery of those which -- Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease. When you combine this with the development of nano-technology, super micro-technology, within a matter of just a few years, we'll be able to identify almost all tumors when they're just a few cells in size, completely unreachable today by all of medical science. And when that happens And when young mothers bring home their babies from the hospital with a little “gene card” telling them what the problems and prospects of their children are, life expectancies in good families In countries with good health systems will rise above 90 years, quite rapidly.

All this is happening in the world we live in. So what I would like to say to all of you, if I were in your position, if I were the Mayor of this community, if I were a young entrepreneur, if I were in charge of public affairs in China, I would be asking {COMMENT="Glitch"} they were wrong when they would say the problems of the world had been caused by globalization. We had a study just a few months ago from the international financial institutions pointing out that developing nations, which chose growth from trade and investment over the last 15 years have grown at 5% a year. Developing nations, which chose growth through closed societies, grew at 1% a year. So we need more trade and more investment. We need a successful new trade --, which will require the United States and other countries to seek reasonable compromises and be prepared to make them.

The second thing I think you need is what the Mayor said. I think there should be continued efforts and internal reform and progress subject to attract evermore investment and make the most of the WTO system. The third thing, I think I would want if I were Chinese, is more effective trading partners throughout Asia and that means more must be done to modernize the systems of other Asian countries so they can make full use of the global trading system and the growth China. For example, in my last year as President, 2000, we did a study on Internet usage in the 19 Asian-Pacific economical operation countries. At present trends, for the 8 wealthiest countries, Internet penetration will be 72% within 5 years; for the 11 poorest, it will be 4%. If I were Chinese, I wouldn't want that to happen. I would want to close that gap and spread technology more evenly throughout the region and generate more wealth, more economic activity and more trading partners for all of you. I think it means more prosperity and more stability in this area.

The second thing I would do, beyond economics, is to say that the protestors against the global economy are wrong when they say the globalization caused the world problems. But they are right to say that the economy will not solve the world's problems. Half of the world's people still live on less $2.00 a day; a billion people live on less than $1.00 a day; a billion people go to bed hungry every night. Therefore, it seems to me, our strategy should be trade and investment plus an attempt to create sensible global economic healthcare and education policies and global security cooperation.

I think the most important things, I will just mention three or four of them. The most important things we can do are first to get the 130 million children of the world who are not in school, in school. 130 million kids don't go to school at all, including 25% of the children in East Asia in the poorest developing countries. Now there are all kinds of strategies that work and I think the United States and other countries should pay --. Every additional year of schooling adds 10-15% to the income of an individual in a developing country. If you do that for enough people, you lift the whole economic prospects of the country.

The second thing I think we should do is to fund The Secretary General of the United Nations called for a $10 billion fund against AIDS and other infectious diseases. There are 10 million kids who die every year of preventable childhood diseases. This year 1 in 4 of all people who die on earth will die of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and infections related to diarrhea, little children who never get any clean water. These kinds of investments will make all those countries more productive, better trading partners, more stable politically. The Secretary General is right about this.

I might say I really admire the way China has openly acknowledged in the last several months that it had twice as many AIDS cases as it thought just a year ago. That gives you a chance to deal with the problem. This is a very manageable problem except in countries that refuse to accept the reality. I did a lot of work on this around the world, in South Africa and India and other places and I think the most important thing is to find out what the facts are, make sure people know this is a 100% preventable disease, make sure people know there is medicine that keeps you alive if you are infected and get a system which gets prevention and the medicine out there.

So I think other countries will be probably trying to figure out how they can follow China's lead over the next three or four years, but being forthright about the facts is very important. There are countries whose total economy will be destroyed by this in the next 5 years, and China will not be one because you're dealing with it. But all of you should support your leaders and the public health personnel in dealing with it. I have seen what's happened in countries that let their infection rates get up to 30%. It impairs their government and it breaks their economy and it leads to more violence. So I think this is a very good thing.

The final thing I'd like to say is this. I have a lot of conversations with President Jiang Zemin in the 8 years I was President about our differences. He even And I'm very grateful for this. On my trip, he supported our having a joint press conference on television in China in which we had honest differences of opinion. It was really exciting for me. He said what he thought about the Tibet. I said I thought he liked the Dali Lama --. It was quite funny. But we had an honest discussion about our differences. The reason we were able to do that, when he thought maybe we shouldn't go into Bosnia because we shouldn't interfere with the internal affairs of another country, I was able to call and discuss why I thought this was important. The reason we were able to do this was a very simple thing. Not because I asked him to stop being the President of China or he asked me to stop being the President of the United States. Not because we all of a sudden came out of the same spiritual tradition or intellectual vision. Not because we thought our countries had identical interests, but because we thought what we had in common was more important than our differences. So that the differences that we have that were good, we could celebrate, the differences that we had that we worried about, we could manage, only because we thought that what we had in common was more important. This is the central question facing the world today.

Why all this fighting in the Middle East? Because they cannot imagine sharing the land, the sacred sites and the future. They think their differences matter more than their common future. I tried as hard as I could for 8 years to persuade them that was not the case. Why did those 19 young people kill themselves on September the 11th to murder 3,100 people in America? Because they thought they were in possession of the truth that we did not share and because we did not share their truth, they could take our lives and the lives of people, including Muslims from 70 other countries, because our differences were all that mattered to them. There was no way they could get to our common humanity and what we shared.

Now you normally, if you're busy in business, you don't think about this every day. But imagine this. You've got all these investors from 40 other countries here. If they hated you, they wouldn't show up. If they thought their religious traditions and their racial or ethnic backgrounds were a bar to treat you as a human being, they would never trust you enough to do business here. This community is a microcosm of the global community we have to build and it requires explicit effort of saying over and over again, the only way our differences can be preserved and honored in an interdependent world is if our common humanity matters more. That's the way we made progress for 8 years between the United States and in China and that's what the world has to do in the future. The WTO itself is a statement for that. We had all kinds of fights in the WTO, maddening fights even in my own area, where, you know, we have to submit these disputes and we don't always agree with the way the WTO is often. Why do we do that? Because we think the WTO is always right and we're wrong if they go against us? No. Because we think the importance of preserving a common system is greater than the importance of our winning everything we feel strongly about.

I hope that now when you read of all these troubles around the world and you think about some issue you have to face, you look at it through that prism. The whole future of the 21st Century depends upon making more communities like this one, open to the world, people not giving up what is distinctive or unique or interesting about themselves, but finding a way to celebrate their differences within a context of their common humanity, finding a way to assert their interest within the context of saying, “what we have in common is more important than whatever divides us.” You can watch over the next 20 or 30 years to see what happens, but I believe the historic contribution of the Chinese leaders have chose to engage the rest of the world. President Jiang and President Yoo, and some of their predecessors, they made the decision that the unique and great history of China manifested in the lives of all of you here or who are younger and have your future before you can only be enhanced if China became a part of the world instead of staying apart from it. So they were able to say, “You know, I don't understand everything America does, but I think we can build a future together.” That idea has to trump what is going on in the Middle East and all the other destructive forces. If it does, in 50 years from now, Mr. Mayor, whoever is the Mayor of this community will be able to give a speech like the one you gave with even better facts. Thank you very much. 

{/speech}
