{title} Remarks at the Clinton Center Topping Out Ceremony {/title}
{event} Clinton Center Topping Out Ceremony {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} May 23, 2003 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you for coming. I'm glad it's not too hot.

You know, I just finished giving a couple of college commencement speeches. It's an awesome feeling. You're standing up there—not President anymore—what you say doesn't have any impact, and you realize you're the only person standing between all those young people and their college degree. When it happened to me, a storm came up so the speaker said, “Ladies and gentlemen, if we don't get out of here, we're all going to drown. I'll send you a copy of my remarks. Good luck and God bless you.” We were ready to elect that guy President.

I'm delighted to be here. I want to thank Senator David Pryor and Barbara for coming. I would like to thank all the people who have helped me with this—beginning with Skip Rutherford and Stephanie Streett and Lynda Dixon. David Alsobrook and his wife and the people from the National Archives who have to look after all these documents that we amassed that I wrote on over the years and gave the government too much stuff to say. I would like to thank Janet for her remarks and all the people from the Sturgis Foundation who are here for the wonderful gift to the Library and Foundation. This history of this state has always been very important to me. I try to protect it, preserve it, and promote it. And one of the things I'm proudest of is that we're going to build, in some ways, the most modern presidential library ever built by a long stretch and in the process, preserve this magnificent old Choctaw Station. I'm very grateful to you all. Thank you very much.

I want to thank Kristin and Amelia for leading the Pledge of Allegiance and my good friend, Bill Clark, for being my friend for a long first of all and secondly for taking on this headache and thirdly for staying on schedule and more or less on budget. There are some days when I'm not doing so well raising money for this thing when I hope he will get behind, but so far he hasn't. So, we're in a race to the finish line.

I'd like to thank the over 80,000 people all across this country who have made contributions of less than $100 to this endeavor. More than 80,000 people. {APPLAUSE}

Just a handful have given as much as the Sturgis Foundation and I hope we can find another handful or two before we're done. But what's really important to me is the people that are giving what they can. Thanks to the internet, you'll be able to tour this library from anywhere in the world. You'll be able to see what the activities of the Foundation are. You'll be able to review the speeches that I'm giving and their backgrounds and sort of continue the education project because I'll be trying to explain at least my point of view on a lot of things that are happening. And I hope that someday we'll have hundreds of thousands of people all over the world who believe that this is worth a modest contribution to capture the history, the present, and the future of America from the point of view of those of you who helped to make me Attorney General and Governor and President over the last 30 years now.

Well, thank you. I look out into this audience and I see so many people who have played a big role in my life. Some of you know this. Hillary and I have been writing our memoirs and she was supposed to go first, so she finished. Her book is coming out in about a month, on June 9th. It's really really good. Arkansas comes out well. She called me this morning. The Senate's in session and she has to vote. She's kind of jealous about my being here. So, she asked me to give you her regards and I want you to know that I think she's done a magnificent job in the Senate. I'm very very proud of what she's doing.

When I first showed my editor the drafts of my memoirs, he said, “Boy, you got a lot in here about Arkansas.” I said, “Read it before you cut it out.” He read it and he said that he laughed and cried and hooted and hollered. And he said, “Did you make half of that stuff up?” And I said, “No, it really happened that way.” He also said, “There's only one thing about you that's wrong with this book. There's only one way that you still act like a politician. You know that you can't run for office anymore?” I said, “I know.” He said, “You cannot write a book for general readers and mention the name of every single person you ever shook hands with. You cannot do that. You got to cut some of this out.” One fellow gave me a copy of Alfred Hitchcock's autobiography and his editors told him the same thing. So he had 100 people he wanted to write about and they said he didn't have space. He put them all in the index with their name indexed to that page so at least they'd know they were mentioned in his book. Well, if I did that, the book would be 2000 pages long.

No person was ever given so many gifts of friendship and support in life as me. Without ever thinking about it in these commencement addresses I've been giving, I said I've lived a highly improbable life. For all of you who have contributed to that, I thank you. I hope this library and museum will capture a little of that life, and, the larger sense. I went into public service because I thought it'd be the most rewarding life on Earth. I never made a nickel until I got out of the White House and I've felt like richest person in the world my whole life because I got to get up everyday and do something I loved. I believed it was noble and honorable.

One of the things that bothers me about the coverage of so much politics today is that it's all about argument. Nobody ever explains anything, and it doesn't matter whether you have facts backing your opinion or not. If you have enough airtime, you just scream it right out and go on. I was raised to believe that there really are consequences, that ideas matter, that the policies based on the ideas matter, and how well you implement them matters. People's lives get better as a result or they don't as the case may be. I thought this was serious work. And I hope that this museum will capture that.

I also hope it will capture America's transformation in to the 21st Century—what it was like when we started, what it was like when we finished, and the connections between the ideas and the actions that we all took and the consequences in the lives of the American people. I hope it will adequately capture the work we're doing now: trying to bring economic opportunity to poor communities in the United States, Africa, and India; trying to fight AIDS in the Caribbean and Africa; trying to build educational opportunities in this country and across the world; and continuing the most important thing to me I ever did by working for racial and religious reconciliation across the globe. I hope that will be apparent here. I hope a lot of people will want to come here because of this School of Public Service that the University has graciously agreed to establish and the Sturgis folks have graciously agreed to house along with the headquarters of the whole operation. I think it's a noble life. If I had to do it over again, I would do it tomorrow.

You have to have a higher pain threshold than you do for most kinds of work—especially this day and age if you belong to our party. But I never thought they could turn Tom Daschle from South Dakota, the hero of farmers and the rural Americans, into some liberal, leftwing ogre. It shows you the power of the media to distort the truth if there's enough money behind it.

It's painful. That's the only political thing I'm going to say today. I like Daschle and I don't like what's being done. This country is still around here because we had free discussion, free debate, and honest people who had disagreements. You know, I was actually for giving President Bush the authority to take out Saddam Hussein but I've learned one thing, having lived a long time. We don't need to criticize those who dissent from us too harshly because after 200 years when you look back on it, the critics turned out to be right about half the time. Then their position became the majority position and then we just kept on going. So maybe it's just because I'm old and not in the fight, but I think that winners ought to be generous to those who disagree because down the road they might be right someday. And you never can tell when you might need another friend.

So, I want to thank all of you for helping me capture all of this. Because I hope that what will be felt when people go through here is not just the story of where America was when we started, where it was when we finished, how the world changed, what we did to get it that way, but also a story of the nobility of public service and how we ought to treat each other as Americans—and how we ought not to stop treating each other as human beings just because we may happen to be Republican, Democrat, or Independent or because we may decide to go into public life.

You know, when I was Governor, I had a lot of good friends in the legislature who were Republicans. I had a lot of good friends in other states whom were Republican governors. I remember when I was a nominee in 1992, President Bush, who I liked very much personally, asked the Governor of New Jersey, Tom Kean, to nominate him. They asked Tom Kean, “You've been working with Governor Clinton a long time—what do you think of him?” And he said, “I think both parties nominated their best.” I love Tom Kean. He could no more give a speech to a national convention having said that then a man on the moon now because now the climate is, you know, it has to be all bad or all good. Life is not a cartoon. It's not a cartoon. It's not two-dimensional and flat. Nothing is all bad or all good. Nobody is all bad or all good. We are hopefully moving together toward a more perfect union. That's what our Founders told us to do. They said that we will never be perfect, but we can always be more perfect than we were yesterday.

In order to do that, we have to believe in the importance and the integrity and the nobility of public service. We have to encourage good people to get in it and I think that graduate program will accomplish that.

So I hope people will get a little history. I hope people will get a little sense of what I'm trying to do now to continue the work of my presidency. I hope young people will be inspired to vote, to be active in politics, and some of them, to run for office themselves. America works. More than half the time, more than half the people have been right on more than half the important issues or we wouldn't all be here today. So, I hope you will leave here a little more optimistic than you were yourself. You know, Bill is just as foolishly optimistic as he was 30 years ago. And that's true. When I left the White House, I was more optimistic and idealistic than the day I walked in. You just can't give up or give in. You got to suit up and go on. And you can't win if you don't play.

I just hope all of you who have played any role in the public life I've had and who have been my personal friends over the years will always know that a piece of this building and its message and the hope that I hope it brings to young people both throughout America and the world—a piece of it is yours.

I never did think I was born in a log cabin I built myself, like a lot of people do. I told someone the other day the reason that I didn't get rid of affirmative action is that I benefited from it. From the time I was old enough to crawl around, there were people helping me for no other reason than they wanted to. I wasn't entitled to it—they just did. And if you were one of them, thank you. I hope you will be proud of what you brought here. God bless you. 

{/speech}
