{title} Remarks of President Clinton at Urban Land Institute, Fall Meeting 2004 {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} November 5, 2004 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much. I was wondering whether, after the results of Tuesday's election, the room would be organized into red and blue areas. {LAUGHTER} I want to thank John Cushman for the introduction and for the work he did for the Scouts, and the work he's now doing on Homeland Security. I may want to say a little more about that in a moment.

Thank you Harry Frampton for inviting me. Thank you Rick Rosen for your service; and thank you ladies and gentlemen of the Urban Land Institute, for the work that you do to build communities that people can live in and enjoy and work in, and hopefully grow, grow closer together in.

I've been excited about the progress of the community, where my office is up in Harlem. We've made a lot of advances there in the last couple of years. And I started, along with Booz Allen Hamilton, the managing partner here, Reggie Van Lee of Small Business Initiative up there, to try to help make better use of the small businesses there and help them to become more profitable. It's worked so well, we've expanded it into Brooklyn, the Bronx, centered at the Stern School of Business at New York University, and we're now trying to take it out across the country. So I'm very, very interested in the kinds of things that you do.

This is the first speech I've given since the election indeed, except for a couple of brief campaign appearances. It's the first speech I've given since I narrowly dodged a heart attack, as I was about to leave on a six nation, 21-day tour of Asia. It's a funny thing, you know, when you-- I think it's highly unlikely that I could have completed that without having a serious incident. So I feel very blessed. And when you get a second chance at life, you have to decide what in the wide world it means, and what you're going to do with it. I think that the best I can say is that I have had the most fortunate of lives and I think whatever time I've got left, I need to find a way to give back to my country and to the world.

In a couple of weeks, I'm going to dedicate my Library down in Little Rock, which will essentially be the first major museum in America chronicling our transformation into the 21st Century. What were the new threats we faced? What were the new opportunities we had? How can we best deal with it? I tried to make it a genuine educational institution and not just a personal shrine to the eight years that my team and I did our best for America. My Foundation here, as you heard, tries to work on, essentially on the millennium goals, on trying to deal with global and American poverty, with the health problems, especially with AIDS, where we're now working in China and India and five African countries and all the Caribbean. We have succeeded in lowering the cost of generic AIDS medicine by 70% and the testing equipment by 70%. So I expect to be full-time at this starting in January, and I hope we're going to save a couple of million lives in the next few years.

We're working to promote the education {APPLAUSE} Thank you. We're working to promote education projects here at home and around the world. And as has been said, citizen service and Associated with my Library, we'll have a graduate program at the University of Arkansas in Public Service. Really the first of its kind in the country, so I'm I hope that more and more young people will believe in the political system and believe in public service, whether they get the outcome they want in particular elections or not. I'm not sure this election didn't raise as many questions as it answered, but I thought I would use it as a starting point to talk about where I hope America and the world will go.

There were two really good things about this election that all Americans should take heart in. First, is we had a really good turnout. The first turnout in excess of 50%, I think since 1992, and an even bigger one. The second is, it was basically generated the old fashioned way, at the grassroots, which I also believe is good. I heard Ralph Reed, the Republican activist in a television kind of debate interview with my friend Harold Licky say that, we'd almost gotten back to pre-television style grassroots voter contact. I think that's partly true, and part of it is due to the explosion of alternative communications options over the Internet. But for whatever reason, that's good.

We also had an unprecedented number of people for both parties giving small amounts of money repeatedly, again over the Internet. So the political system is alive and well. This is the first election in four in which the Democrats did not win the popular vote. And the election basically was a shift, for President Bush moved from 49% in 2000, to 51% in 2004. So I don't think there's really been enough time for anybody to offer definitive conclusions, but I know a little bit about this and so I thought I would {LAUGHTER} just say a thing or two, that I hope will be fair to both of them.

First of all, after 9/11, we were united as never before as a country and had the political climate maintain that sense of national unity in purpose and the focus on the hunt for bin Laden and the dismantling of terrorist networks. Now this probably would not have been an election at all. It would have been an election decided somewhere in the 55 to 60% range, because we all just wanted to go forward. On September 12th, at least those of us who were here in New York City, we didn't care about party politics or anything else. We just wanted our country to be together and go forward. A decision was made by the administration to use that moment to try to implement an agenda that pushed the country further to the right, and that divided the world. And it worked, I suppose, at least in the short run. But it made a competitive race possible in 2004, especially after the 2002 Congressional elections, in which people like Senator Max Cleveland in Georgia, who lost two legs and an arm in Vietnam, were pictured in ads along with Saddam Hussein as traitors to the country, because they wanted minor changes in the Homeland Security Bill.

So what happened? Well, the Republicans had a clear message, a good messenger, a great organization and a great strategy. The Democrats had a rough time after Senator Kerry was, in effect, won the nomination and were all but finished when both conventions were over. And then John Kerry bravely, I think, and almost single-handedly put himself back in the race with his performance in the debates. So after that, we had an election. All the polls said the election was close and it turned out to be. And no one could quite The reason all those polls were in conflict, and the reason the exit polls were confusing is that, when you have a close race with a new turnout (that is with all these new voters), all the polls you read were right. The ones that said Kerry was ahead, the ones that said Bush was ahead, the ones that said it was even. They were all right. In other words, they correctly measured the people they talked to. All the exit polls were right. The problem is, no one knew exactly what the pool would be. And of the new registrants, there were more Democrats than Republicans. But in the aggregate turnout of voters the increase was more or less the same, which means the Republicans did a better job of turning out voters who were already registered who hadn't voted before. And when you saw like those maps of Ohio or Central Florida, that's by and large what you were seeing, and all those little towns in rural areas all across America.

The strategy was clear and simple. Basically they worked on turnout on their base and then the President, as candidate, tried to appear more moderate to win the swing voters. If you look at what moved in the last two elections, about 1% of the vote change was due to increased performance among Hispanic voters, who voted on national security and where some of them were culturally conservative. And about 2% was due to a big increase in performance among women, chiefly white married women who had been the soccer moms of 1992 and 1996, who turned out to be the security moms of 2004, and were basically They were the like undecided voters that swung at the end to President Bush, because they decided they didn't want to change horses in the middle of the fight against terror and the management of problems in Iraq.

Now, what you had therefore was It was fascinating, and I was going out to, in the last days of the campaign. You could sense this. The people just didn't know what to do and there was So that you had a majority, a substantial one, who was, in theory, open to changing Presidents and a substantial one, that was reluctant to change horses in the middle of a terrorism stream. And the people were at odds, And the conflict manifested by that 3 or 4% of undecided voters at the end, was really something that a lot of people felt, who had already made up their mind to vote for President Bush or Senator Kerry, as so often happens. And you saw, of course, in this campaign, there were Kerry got out

President Bush got his share of bad breaks with bad news coming out of Iraq. But they weren't nearly as significant, in my opinion, as the impact, adverse impact that Senator Kerry suffered because of the Massachusetts Supreme Court case on gay marriage and the emergence, inexplicable emergence of Osama bin Laden at the end of the campaign. {LAUGHTER} Because it sort of made the security issue the issue again. Whether he did it with any intent, whether he was trying to help one or the other, who knows.

I actually finally got the full text of what he said, confirming once again to me, that he is a brilliant formidable and deeply troubled and twisted adversary. But if you're interested in it, you can get it off the Internet. Now you ought to get the whole statement of everything he said. I think it is by and large a mistake for our party, at least, to sit around and, you know, whine about this, that or the other thing, and worry about the tactics. Fundamentally we've had four elections now where we're competitive. Before that, from 1968 until 1992, we only won once, and we got beat bad all the other times. And we won once in 1976, by one point, after Watergate. So for those of you who are Democrats out there, you shouldn't be all that discouraged.

Because you might be interested to know, the only demographic group that John Kerry picked up strength in, over Al Gore and me, was white men with college degrees and higher incomes. It's really interesting. Groups that are normally Republican, but are much more fact-based than faith-based in their politics. They were interested in evidence. They were concerned about the deficit. They were concerned with the drift in the economy. They were concerned about the management of security affairs. And they listened to people, like all these Generals and Admirals that endorsed Kerry, and they thought it made sense. So Kerry actually had gains among white men with college degrees and higher incomes. That's the only demographic group that we held steady in all the ones I didn't mention. So basically what you still have is, a country that's pretty evenly divided. And even more sharply divided over the culture wars than we were in 1968, when they propelled Mr. Nixon to the presidency.

And so I think that this election presents great opportunities for President Bush, and great opportunities for the Democrats. And the two are not necessarily in conflict. In fact, the country would probably be better off if both of them took advantage of their opportunities. The President has a chance to get a lot done in his second term legislatively. Not simply because he has a Republican majority, but because he's got an agenda and he'll work at it. I had a Republican Congress my second term and we got an enormous amount done. So he can do a lot. And some of these things need tending to.

This is not popular maybe for a Democrat to say, I think we need some sort of legislation to deal with the medical malpractice problem. And I think it's very important to {APPLAUSE} I think it's very important to recognize what the problem is. It's not just that the malpractice premiums are 1% or half or whatever they are total healthcare costs. They're a huge percentage of most doctors' incomes and they affect the way medicine is practiced, in a way that's almost certainly bad for the patient. They also drive young people, get the young people away from certain areas.

One of my daughter's best friends is a student at Columbia Medical School. And so I see her from time to time with Chelsea and I I always get her to tell me about medical school and how it works, what they're doing. They go around and they do this specialty, then that specialty, then the other one. And, you know, she's a brilliant young woman. And she loves OB/GYN, but she doesn't think she could possibly afford the malpractice premiums for years after she gets out of medical school. That's a travesty. And I could give you lots of other examples. The question is, you know, what should we do?

And the contribution Democrats ought to make to this, is to make sure that what we're trying to do is to alleviate the real problem and not necessarily do everything the insurance companies want to do, which I think would lead to some people who are the genuine victims of gross negligence not being compensated and made whole. That could also put bad incentives into the medical system. There are ways to do it. Georgia adopted a tort reform law not too long ago that some of my friends have said is working pretty well to manage bogus lawsuits and bogus defenses. So we ought to look at this. But this is something that needs to be done.

We are going to have to do something about Social Security and the option that I left on the table is no longer available. When I left office, with the projected surplus the way it was, my recommendation, but I couldn't get the Congress to adopt, but we left it out there and we left the money there to pay for it, was to use the savings on interest from running a surplus instead of a deficit to put back into the Social Security Trust Fund. Why? Because from the 80's until the middle of my second term, when we began to run a surplus, we had been spending the Social Security Trust Fund, and basically just giving them government guarantees that we'd put it back in. So I thought we ought to put it back in, plus the interest savings, and that would have taken Social Security out to 2053, beyond the life of all but the most fortunate baby-boomers. I mean, you know, now that I had this operation, I may live to be 107, but it seems unlikely. {LAUGHTER} 

I So that option was taken off the table by the passage of the two big tax cuts. Now here's the problem. In theory, it would be a good thing to give younger Social Security recipients the option of investing some of their payroll. Say taking 2% of their payroll, investing it in some mutual fund. And you could, you know, you could actually constrain the choices. If you're worried about them making imprudent choices, you could say Like in the Federal Employee Retirement Plan, we had four options. Three different mutual fund-like options, and one standard Social Security-like option, invest in government securities, where it's a guarantee but a lower return.

The problem with that is that running the deficit we're running, when you start to let people take their 2% out, you will diminish the funds we have to pay current retirees. And all estimates are, it would create about a trillion-dollar hole. So how will that hole be filled? We could just borrow the money the way we're borrowing on the $400-and-whatever billion dollar deficit we've got. But if we do, it will put further pressure on the dollar. And to keep the dollar up, it will put further pressure on interest rates, which will be bad for all of you.

But there has to be some way of dealing with this, because otherwise, we'll start to pay out more than we're taking in, in about 15 years. And we'll just flat run out of money now by, I think, 2038 or something. I don't think they've quite lost all the time we had built up, but this is an opportunity to do something, and to just totally level with the American people and tell them what the actuarial problems are. Tell them what the money issues are, and figure it out. I should also remind you though, if you take all this money that now is going into buying government securities, and you give it back to people, and they invest it for their own welfare, they may earn a higher return. Because over time, returns from the stock markets are always better than guaranteed return from government securities. But then that money will have to be replaced, since we're running such huge deficits every year, which may mean that we'll have to raise the interest rates on government securities to get people to invest in them, which could aggravate our deficit problems.

I'm just trying to say, this is not a simple problem, therefore it cries out for a bipartisan solution free of rancor and rhetoric and animus. And it's an opportunity. I think there will be a tremendous opportunity to make progress on the Middle East peace in the next four years. If Mr. Arafat passes away, is permanently incapacitated. If the Palestinians can settle on a single leader, first of the Fatah Movement, the Arafat movement. Maybe even branching out into the other Palestinian factions, especially if such a person could be democratically elected, then the burden would shift to the Israelis to figure out how to engage with such a person. And they know what a peace deal looks like. That's the good news about all the work we did back in 2000. Everybody knows more or less what we got to do. The question is, do they trust each other to keep their word? And do they have the capacity to implement their commitments?

So that's why I say it's important for the Palestinians to elect a solid leader. You could elect someone who had no swat and he could be absolutely trustworthy, but have no capacity. So you have to have trustworthiness and capacity for the Israelis to give up the land necessary to make a final peace, so that they can share the future together. But it's an enormous opportunity and it wouldn't surprise me if we didn't have a peace agreement that looked more like, more or less like where we were in 2000, somewhere in the next four years. And it's really worthy of our best efforts, and it ought to be put entirely beyond politics, just because it's the right thing for the world. It would also take an enormous sting out of the impulse for terror.

Now, for the Democrats there's a lot of opportunity, both political and substantive. In the last two years, they've finally, for the first time in modern times, equaled the Republicans in their ability to raise money and in their technological capacity. Now they have to integrate their grassroots effort with the parties' operation, the same way the Republicans have. And they need a clear national message, and they have to do this without one big advantage the Republicans have, which is they won't have a theological message, that basically paints the other guys as evil. If you read what these people said in these little towns in Ohio that went five to one for President Bush, I mean they think those of us that didn't agree with him are aliens from another planet. {LAUGHTER} 

It's very interesting. A friend of mine told me that one of her coworkers was a conservative Christian Evangelical, who canvassed in one of these communities in Eastern Pennsylvania for John Kerry. And she was surprised he was for Kerry, so she said, “Why are you?” He said, “Because I think his policies are more moral and more pro-life.” But he said, “I had to talk for 45 minutes to these people before they'd even listen to me, because they have had decades in which they've been told that the Democrats are anti-family, anti-morality.” And I said, “Well what? You know, was it all?” He says, “It's abortion, gay marriage, the whole thing.” So, and this guy told her, he said, you know, “It's almost like we're young people and we go to two different schools and the Democrats are rich snobby élitists, and they're not, so they got to cheer for their team, no matter who's on the field or whether they foul or clip.” It's like a tribalism almost. We can't really go very far in America with that. That's what we're trying to combat everywhere else in the world.
But it is our fault, if we let it happen. You know, if we let people believe that our party doesn't believe in faith and family, and doesn't believe in work and freedom, and that there is no moral content to policies that aggravate inequality and are not fair and deprive people of opportunity, that's our fault. I always tell people, the Republicans are in business to beat us, that's their job. But if we help them, that's our fault. And you know, we have to be present with a compelling message in those small towns and rural areas. Maybe I feel more strongly about this, because I was born in a small town and I grew up in a State that's now supposed to be a permanent red State. They gave me a majority both times I ran for President. That wasn't all that long ago.

There are people who are willing to discuss this. But, for example, this is kind of interesting. When I was President, we had an Office of Religious Affairs that reached out to Muslims, Jews, Bahais everybody, and also had regular contact with the Evangelicals. I said that I was pro-choice, but I wanted to make abortion more rare. We had a set of policies designed to do it. We made adoption much more attractive. We made it We removed the disincentives of young single mothers to leave their parents in order to get aid, so they could stay home, stay in school, raise their kids. For those who did, we set up these, began to set up this network of second chance homes. And in Welfare, we actually started working with faith-based initiatives through the Welfare system. Now it might surprise you to know that in the eight years I served, the number of abortions went down somewhere between 22 and 25%, and they've gone up again since I left office. I bet it would shock people in all those places that think we're anti-life to know that. But if we don't make the argument, we can't complain if we're demonized and cartoonized and turned into two-dimensional aliens.

You know, if you don't have a conversation, you can't It's like if you lay out a bunch of nails on a kitchen table and you put a big old magnet over here, and there's nothing else there, all the nails will go to the magnet. If you put an even smaller one over here, you'll pick up some of the nails. And it's just crazy for one party, our party, to not really have, engage people in this conversation.

On the gay marriage thing, I think we had a totally defensible position against the National Constitutional Amendment. Marriage has been a matter of religious doctrine in State law for over 200 years, ever since the beginning of this republic. There has been one, one, State Supreme Court to say that gay marriage should be legalized. There were 11 measures on the ballot this time. I'd say at least ten of them passed, restoring the traditional definition of marriage. And Massachusetts will have it on the ballot next year, and as far as I know, I'm almost positive this is right. It's the earliest they can have it. John Kerry said he was going to vote for it, but he only said it once or twice, not 3,000 times in rural communities all across America.

The point I'm trying to make is, and you may be pro-gay marriage, but whether you're pro or anti, we should engage this debate. We shouldn't run from like Denial is not an option. If there's a pink elephant in the living room, you shouldn't keep moving the chairs hoping you won't have to sit on its feet. {APPLAUSE} You have to be able, as a people, to discuss this. I find that people, most people I know, are hungry to sit around and talk about this with people who don't necessarily agree with them. Most Americans don't live totally by rationality and don't judge their lives totally by their economic standing. I hardly know anybody who does, and yet that's the cartoon that's up there on the wall in all those little old towns that buried us in this election. So most of those folks still won't vote for us, because we have honest disagreements, but some will, if we engage them.

Finally, let me say this. I think the most important thing is, what is the framework within which we should evaluate all these policy decisions? Is it a good or bad thing for us to have a $400 billion dollar deficit, more or less permanently, for example? My framework is simple. It has basically four or five points. One is, the fundamental fact of the present moment is that we live in an interdependent world in an increasingly diverse country.

Secondly, we do have to have a security system, because the nation state is under assault from non-state actors primarily, from terrorists. And affiliated groups, organized criminals, the people who would seek to make very powerful weapons out of chemical, biological and nuclear substances. And therefore, we need to have a real strategy for dealing with it that's effective. And I agree, when President Bush said, we ought to fight it abroad and not just at home, I agree with that. That you can argue about the details of Iraq, but that's true. I mean one of the things I'll tell you one thing that he and I agreed on and therefore it never got any publicity, somebody asked me about... {LAUGHTER} 

...anytime we do anything together in this I mean all the Democrats and all the Republicans agree. People ask me all the time about this bracelet. This bracelet comes from Columbia. And it was given to me by a bunch of children who sing and dance for peace. They live on the edge of an area dominated by the narco-traffickers. 35% of the land mass of the oldest democracy in Latin America, Columbia, is dominated by the narco-traffickers and their terrorist supporters. Can you imagine how we would feel in America if even one of our States, even the least populous, had a third of it's land mass dominated in essence by a foreign power? And since 2000, on a totally bipartisan basis, we've been helping them with something called “Plan Columbia.”

So we do need to do more of that and there are lots of things we can do in Homeland Security. Those of you who come from urban areas, you should demand that we don't let another year go by before we're checking a minimum of 10 and preferably 15% of the cargo containers at our ports and airports. There's all kinds of security evidence that if you check, 15, 20% (maybe as little as 10), you can have a deterrent affect on people inserting dangerous substances into those cargo containers. You can't do it where we are now, at 5%. So there's lots of stuff to do. But the That's the second point.

The third point is we cannot kill, jail or occupy all our adversaries. We can't do it in an interdependent world. You need open borders. You need easy travel. You need the mobility of money. You need the mobility of technology. You need to be able to go someplace else in a hurry. You need for people to be able to come see you and not be hassled to the point of being enchained at airports. Therefore we have to have a world that is not only more secure, but a world in which we have more partners and fewer terrorists. And we have to work therefore, on the whole set of millennium goals, on fighting poverty and disease and ignorance. And the fact that one in four people don't have access to clean water. And the absence of peace in parts of the world, and the need for greater cooperation, institutionalized cooperation on problems like global warming.

Now in a world like this, what is the role of government? I would argue you don't need a big bureaucratic top-down government in the way we needed in the industrial era. But you do need a strong government who's job it is to create the conditions and give people the tools to build their own lives. Their family lives, their work lives, their community lives.

And finally, what are the animating values of an interdependent world and a diverse America? That there ought to be shared responsibilities, shared opportunities, a shared sense of community, where everybody values work and family, and faith and the freedom to have your own faith, and to search for the truth as you see it. A sense of fairness can only come from real sharing. And I think that You know, my party has a great opportunity because we've always believed in this stuff. We just need to make it clear and then we can stick our policies in there and it will make some sense. You won't just have a laundry list of policies.

But the point I want to make to all of you is, whichever way this election had gone, the fundamental realities in the modern world won't change. We are an interdependent world. We do need greater security, but we can't kill, jail or occupy all our adversaries. Therefore we have to build a world with more partners and fewer terrorists. And while we're doing it, we've got to make America stronger at home and the only way we can possibly do it is to have a country where we share the responsibilities and the benefits and a sense of community. So I hope that we'll be able to diminish the culture wars, not by getting people to give up what they think is right and wrong, but by getting them to listen to one another and look at one another as people again, and not cartoons. Thank you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
