{title} Remarks at the RFK Memorial Dinner {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Bill Clinton {/speaker}
{date} December 12, 2002 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Well, thank you very much for that introduction. I must say, I ought to have better sense than the {COMMENT="Unintelligible"} becoming a better speaker than me. Last year we were together in Los Angeles, at the Natural Resources Defense Council, and he got up and spoke before I'd ever, I just wanted to leave town. I want to thank you for everything you've done to save America's environment, and the environment of the world. And I'm very grateful to you for that.

And I want to thank every member of this great family, I thank Andrew and Kerry for being part of my administration, and Joe for serving in Congress with me, and helping me. And thank you Lori for the work you do, and, Kathleen, who's not here, whom I was honored to help in this last campaign. Thank you, Ethyl, for being my Valentine. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} And I know I'm not the only one, I'm happy to be just one of your legion of admiring lap dogs, as far as you all are from… {LAUGHTER} {COMMENT="Unintelligible"} 

You know, every time someone gives a speech at an event like this, they want to quote Robert Kennedy who was so wonderfully eloquent. I'm going to do something highly unusual, but in light of the events of the last two days, it seems to me appropriate, I want to paraphrase, paraphrase one of America's most prominent Republican leaders. When Robert Kennedy ran for president, we supported him.

We're proud of it. And if he had been elected, we wouldn't have had all of these problems over all these years. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} I believe it, I don't have to apologize for it… {LAUGHTER} and I will not have to explain it in the morning.

I had the honor to speak at Arlington Cemetery on the 25th anniversary of Robert Kennedy's death. And I re-read the speech this morning. It was the heartfelt yearning of a young president for someone I had admired more than I had the words to say. And when he died, it was my mother's birthday two days before I graduated from college, at Georgetown. On the 30th anniversary of Senator Kennedy's death, we all gathered at Joe's home in Boston, and I did a radio show there, my weekly radio address was on Robert Kennedy. And I re-read that, I thought, you know, I was a little older and more seasoned, and I was thinking about the application of the life of Senator Kennedy to the moment in which we were moving. Now, I'm just a guy, I don't have any power any more but I'm just as idealistic as I was when I was a boy. We were talking about Martin Luther King's dream of the poor person's campaign on the mall… to honor Dr. King and Senator Kennedy, on the day after I graduated from Georgetown, I went down there and tried to be of some use. And it was the muddiest the mall has ever been, I don't know if any of you remember, if you were there then, the whole place was just covered in mud. And they had to keep putting down these wooden slats, so that everybody who wanted to do anything could at least kind of navigate. And I thought, well, this was really appropriate.

And now you say that carrying on the legacy of Robert Kennedy requires us to define a new age, in terms of what we are and what we're for, not in terms of what we're against and who we're not. And I think that is more profound than most people know. I spent most of my time trying to put things together, and overcome people who were trying to take things apart. Because it occurs to me that, at the end of the Cold War, for the first time in all of human history, we had the chance to build a truly global community committed to peace and prosperity and freedom and security.

It also strikes me that since we are inter-dependant; the alternative to creating such a community is at best a more confined and insecure life and, at worse, a very dangerous one. For what we saw here on September the 11th was nothing but the flip side of our interdependence. The interdependence we love, when we get on the cell phone, and call people halfway around the world. The interdependence we love, I've got a country cousin who lives in the mountains of north Arkansas who plays chess with a guy from Australia every week over the Internet. The interdependence we love at 30% of our growth in those wonderful 90s came from global trade. Those guys used interdependence, too, on September the 11th; they used open doors, easy travel, easy immigration, access to the information and technology, to kill 3100 interdependent people from 70 countries, including over 200 Muslims.

So, the world we should wish to make is not just interdependent, but is an integrated community of people with shared values and benefits and responsibilities. And if Robert Kennedy were alive today, he would be working for that kind of world.

And since he wore the uniform of our country, and was our top law enforcement official, he would have some very tough positions to deal with a terrorist threat. But he would remind us that no country in history has ever been defeated by terrorism, and no serious person thinks we will be. If tin were a bomb for a planet in New York City, we would not be defeated by terrorism, we would only be steeled in our determination to overcome it. {APPLAUSE} So the only that this issue of terror we're dealing with now, our Saddam Hussein, our North Koreas, little… bomb indulgence, the only way those things can ever really gnarl and warp our future is if we are provoked to respond in a way that compromises the character of our country, or the future of our children, or the nature of our responsibilities to those who are less fortunate than we are at home and around the world. That's the only way.

So yes, we should have a security policy, I have a lot of views on that, which should wait for another day. But today's interdependent environment a security policy isn't enough to have the life you want, unless you can kill or jail everybody who doesn't share your values, your benefits and your responsibilities. A security policy alone will never be enough.

We also have to do more to make a world where we have more partners and friends and fewer terrorists than enemies. We spend less on that than anybody in the world. That the development conference that was recently held in South Africa, they want the world to go from 50 to 100 billion dollars a year in three or four years, and assistance, our share of that will be about 12 billion dollars, we'd have to double our aid, to give you some idea of what that involves. I think that combined increases for domestic homeland defense and the defense department this year, in one year, was something on the order of 65 billion dollars. So, we could do what the U. N. and the world has asked us to do for one fifth of what we coughed up in one year, for defense and homeland defense, it'd be the best money we ever spent.

Those of us who are baby boomers grew up in a world darkened by the Cold War, but a world where we never had to fight World War III, never had to see another nuclear weapon drop, never really had to worry about the security of our youth and when we married, our children, because at the end of World War II, Harry Truman and George Marshall and Douglas MacArthur didn't want to fight a third World War. And so, we had the Marshall plan for Europe, including Germany, our enemy, who did worse things to us and everyone else, and especially to the Jews of the world, than anything that these terrorists have done, and we helped Japan that, a country that ran the worst POW camps in human history and degraded and demeaned people in ways that had never been before seen in modern warfare, and MacArthur said no, but we should make them a modern democracy, we should make them friends.

So today, 50 years later, when we found out North Korea's working on a nuclear weapon in a lab, the President of the United States can say, and be taken seriously, “Well, we have to work with Japan on this. And Russia and China, our former adversaries, and South Korea, and... without regard to party.” We'll say, “Yeah, that's what we ought to do.” A miracle born of decades of commitment to build a world with more friends and fewer enemies.

Today, that means that we cannot be arrogant enough to claim for ourselves forever what we would deny to others. With this money that we should spend… we know now how to alleviate poverty though debt relief, and the right sort of forum assistance and trade. We know how to put the 130 million children of the world who aren't in school, in school. We know how, because we have lots of examples to build health systems in countries that will reverse the AIDS epidemic before it becomes the worse plague since the Bubonic Plague killed a third of Europe in the 14th century.

We know how to do all this. It's just a question of whether we will. And here at home, I only have in jest paraphrase Senator Lott at the beginning of my remarks, so maybe that was exuberance, but the fact that elections were decided, and my native South, and Georgia, and South Carolina, in part, based on the confederate flag in 2002, is not something I imagined.

The fact that Senator John McCain lost the Republican primary in one state in 2000 in part because the opponents were on the phone reminding people that he had adopted a black baby, and they shouldn't forget that before he, they went to vote, is something I didn't imagine, and it was not a slip of the tongue. In fact, God bless him, he'd adopted a child from India, who was particularly dark skinned. Something I thought commended him to the electorate.

I say that to remind you that when you see things around the world, you wonder, well, how could the tribal wars in Africa occur? Why don't they get their act together in the Middle East? Dear God, I feel terrible about what happened in Bosnia. How could they make peace and still riot in Belfast? Don't forget, there's a heart of darkness that potentially lurks within us all.

And I will just close with this. You know, one of the Kennedy kids did a great favor by putting out a book of all his father's favorite sayings, in poetry, and lines from speeches, and from plays, and if you don't have it, you ought to go get it. But, one of the things you learn if you read ancient literature, or ancient history, anthropology, is that people have always struggled to find meaning in life in ways that are both positive and negative. Ever since the first people came out of caves, and clans, we, unless you're a hermit, or a saint, you have to find some meaning in your life that is relational. I'm Irish, I'm a Catholic, I'm a Protestant, I'm an American, I'm from some other country, I'm a man, I'm a woman, I'm a liberal, I'm a conservative, I'm a Democrat, I'm a Republican, I'm a whatever. You know, we got all these boxes. And when we add all our boxes up, that's part of our identity. And we draw some personal positive meaning from it, but usually, we also have defined ourselves throughout history by what we were not.

Often, with disastrous consequences. Well, first of all, we've all done it, there's not a person here of a certain age who hasn't committed the following offense, said to yourself, well, I may not be perfect, but for God's sakes, at least I'm not him. I may have done this terrible thing, but goodness gracious, at least I didn't do that terrible thing, which is worse, right? We all do this. But when we do it as a matter of social and political policy, it becomes potentially disastrous. And I don't know if human history can be seen, but basically as people widening the circle of their contacts and interdependence, taking in people who are different, and then struggling to recognize that they're not so different after all before their means to destroy them overtakes them.

Because human history has seen increasing interdependence and increasing power of the weapons of destruction, and a whole race of the human consciousness to catch up. Throughout time, we've all been called on to expand the definition of who is us, and to shrink the definition of who is them. And when we don't, don't do it, then we can't share. And you have the disaster that we have in the Middle East today. They are completely interdependent, they cannot escape each other, and they cannot kill or jail each other completely. They cannot do it.

And so they labor on, in this purgatory, as more children kill and die. Because they haven't decided to share the future. They will someday, and when they do, they'll have to share it on more or less the same terms we all know now. I say this, because it seemed to me, in 1968, when I so desperately wanted Robert Kennedy to be elected president, I wanted him for the very reason that his son said, he had all these southern rednecks and all these white liberals and all these black people and all these Latinos who were for him. And very often, they couldn't pass a test with rational answers about why they were in the same count with other people, but somehow, he brought them together, they could see in him that what we had in common was more important than these things that were driving a stake through the heart of America.

And that's what the world needs today. You've got all these people today that are full of courage, they're more than willing to die blowing some people up. You know it, we don't want to say it, but it took some guts to run a plane into the World Trade Center. There are people, plenty of people with enough guts to have nihilistic murder written behind their name in human history. And not so many people with the courage to risk their lives, this Dr. King, and President Kennedy, and Robert Kennedy, and… Gandhi, and Sadat, and Rabin, and Mandela did. That is the courage the world needs today.

The courage to stand up and say, you know our differences still are very interesting, but our common humanity matters more. Since we cannot escape each other, we must go forward together. We need people like Robert Kennedy who don't even have to say it, who just embody it. Whose words embrace people in a way that made rednecks want to give up defining themselves by whether they had the Confederate flag, for God's sakes, running on the state capitol. You know, when people care about that in 2002 they don't have enough to think about. Somebody hasn't been talking to them. I'll give you another, just totally trivial, this deal about whether women are going to be allowed to be members at Augusta. President Bush wants this guy to be Secretary of the Treasury, so he has to dump his Augusta membership, why? Because there's a bunch of guys sitting in there in that clubhouse tonight, thinking that they're Davey Crockett and Jim Bowie at the Alamo, you know, they're holding back, they got to keep those women out of that golf club, now…we're laughing, but it's a big deal to them. Why? How, how did they ever, any of us, get to the point where we define the importance of our lives by what we can keep somebody else from doing or being.

And that's the way, that's the way those guys are behaving down there in that clubhouse, is the way most people have behaved throughout most of human history. Most of those people are perfectly fine people. If you met them one on one, you'd be happy to have dinner with them. Most of them have lived exemplary lives, and honorable lives. But they've got themselves in a fix now, for the meaning of their lives depends on keeping the women from being members of a golf club.

But they're not bad people. This happens, and what the world needs today is people who have the courage even to risk their lives to bring people together. Don't forget, Gandhi was killed by a Hindu, not a Muslim, Sadat was killed by an Egyptian, not an Israeli commando, and my friend Itzhak Rabin was killed by an angry young Israeli, not a PLO terrorist. That is the courage we leave today.

The courage to lead your own people to a farther shore, in the words of my great friend Shane Wassini, to believe in miracles and cures and healing wells. To believe that hope in history can rhyme, they must rhyme. And therefore, the legacy of Robert Kennedy is more important today than it was on the day after he died. Even more important than the day that he ran for president and tried to bring America together.

Because today, that is really the challenge facing the whole world. We are all in the future together, now, we cannot escape each other. We saw it on September the 11th, we live with it every day in the Middle East, we either will share the future or we will continue to rob our children of it. We will not be defeated by terrorism. The only thing that can defeat the idea of America, and the progress of the human spirit is if we respond in a way, I will say again, that compromises the character of our country, the future of our children, or the nature of our obligation to people who don't have enough to be part of this world, at home and around the world. Therefore, every day, get up and think of Robert Kennedy, and as yourself, what could I do to bring things together, no matter how hard others try to take them apart? Thank you, and God bless you. 

{/speech}
