{title} Speech at Center on the Grove {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} Alan Keyes {/speaker}
{date} May 11, 2000 {/date}
{source} http://www.renewamerica.us {/source}
{description} Question and Answer Session has been removed {/description}


{speech} 

Good evening. Sorry I'm a little late--subject to the vagaries of airline travel these days. And we actually jumped in here the last part in one of these little planes, bouncing around a little bit today. It was kind of windy. So, if it takes me a minute to settle down, it's probably because my brains are still jiggling from the flight. {LAUGHTER}

But I want to thank you for taking a moment or two to share time with me to think through the challenge that is facing our nation right now--a challenge that can be obscured a little bit by the material circumstances in which we find ourselves, but which, nonetheless, I think is on the minds of many Americans. It's also a challenge that has an enormous practical bearing politically on what we are likely to see take place in this country this fall. Now, I don't want to make any assumptions about whom I am talking to, so, I'll take a little poll first. Do we have any Republicans here? {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE}

Anybody want to raise your hands? We have a few Republicans, obviously. And anybody here might want to see the Clinton era brought to an end and Al Gore defeated? {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} I rather thought so. But see, on both counts, though, I've got some bad news, I'm afraid. {LAUGHTER} I do. And it's actually good news, but it's bad news. Right? I mean, the good news is that this country's still in the midst of an economy that's more than chugging along--even making allowances for the fact that since Bill Clinton is President, they're probably lying about all the numbers. {LAUGHTER}

I can attest from my travels around the country to the reality that unemployment is low. That, in some places, you actually have what we haven't seen in America in some time, an employment crunch, where folks can't find the workers that they that need, they are so desperate to get people in. This is not necessarily wonderful, but it does indicate, doesn't it, that the economic machine is moving right along. So, there may be a little trace of inflation here or there, but it doesn't appear to be anything that we need to worry about at the moment, overall. So, that as these things go, the economy's only in the best shape that it's been in the lifetimes of most Americans. That's good news, for most Americans.

It's bad news, politically, for the Republican Party.

So, I have to tell you that in good economic times, and I would assume that goal is for unprecedentedly good economic times, in good economic times, the American people have never, at least not in the 20th century--one professor went all the way back to 1880, I understand, with an analysis, and he found the same thing--the American people have never, in good prosperous economic times, taken the White House from one party and given it to another. Do you realize that? Never happened. Therefore, you look at the precedents, and you're going to come to a hard and fast conclusion that, as we chug along in great economic times, the Democrats are likely to prevail in November. I know it's sad. It's sad. But those are the hard facts. We are walking uphill. We are walking into the stiff wind of material prosperity, and the fact that that makes a lot of people kind of complacent.

In one respect, it's perfectly understandable. Americans are not like some folks in the world. We actually seem to still have a semblance of common sense, and even gratitude.

You know, when Winston Churchill did a great job during the Second World War, after the war ended, and he had lead his people to victory over the terrible Nazi menace and inspired their hearts and encouraged them and built up their armed forces--after he had been proven right in every committee he'd sat in in the 1930's, and all the things he thought the country should do, and did such a wonderful job, they kicked him out of office.

See, generally speaking, Americans don't do that. Do a good job, and we'll leave you in there. And very often, the measure of that good job is how well off people are doing, in a material sense.

And, if that's a measure of a good job, regardless--now, you can get in an argument if you want, "They didn't do anything." Sad to say, see? Do you know when we really get into problems doing that? We get into problems trying to do that because we want to pretend that we shouldn't give credit to the incumbent party in the White House, and then all our Congress people will be out there saying you should give credit to our incumbent people in the Congress. So, why are people looking at that? If we're going to credit to one set of politicians, why not give credit to the others? Especially since we know, in our heart of hearts, that neither set politicians deserves that credit, but it belongs to the credit of the American people. {APPLAUSE}

So, if we're handing out credit where credit is not due, we'll give it to the Democrats in the White House, as well as the Republicans in the Congress, who'll come around begging for it at election time. You can see, that kind of puts us in an awkward situation, doesn't it? Because, if Americans are in a mentality that says, "Let's reward incumbents for this wonderful material prosperity," that puts Democrats back in the White House and that puts the Republicans back in control of Congress, because that's where the incumbency lies right now--and we'll lose the presidential election.

Now, judging by the enthusiastic response I got a minute ago, that makes a lot of you in this room unhappy. The thought that we are going to continue the Clinton era--the Clinton era of moral betrayal, the Clinton era that betrays our national security, the Clinton era that assaults our control over our schools, and our money, and our lives--ought very well to make you sick to death. But more than that, it ought to make you fearful of the future of freedom and self-government in America. I think a few more years of these rapacious destroyers of our character and liberty, and we won't have any liberty left.

And I thought it was proven, once again, in the way that they handled this whole business down in Miami. Now, regardless of which side you mean to take in this supposed "family dispute," it does seem to me that most people with common sense would kind of reach the conclusion that you wouldn't want to deal with that family squabble with automatic weapons. {APPLAUSE} But apparently, in this, as in many other things, Janet Reno is a stranger to common sense and decency. {LAUGHTER} And so she sends in the people armed with automatic weapons, and so forth.

The other thing that wasn't a coincidence, of course, is that this particular travesty--which, by the way, has been decried even by folks on the left. Don't you think that's amazing? I mean, when you have Alan Dershowitz and Alan Keyes agreeing to decry the same thing, you got to know something's wrong. {LAUGHTER} And that's what happened in this particular case.

So, we know something's up. But isn't it interesting that in this episode, just as we've seen before, this administration crosses the line, uses these kind of tactics--in order to do what? In order to serve the interest of a communist dictator. {APPLAUSE} And you notice how they love to kowtow to these communist dictators, just about how they are doing now with China? And they're out there, "Oh, for permanent, Most-Favored Nation status, for this brutal dictatorial regime that tortures Christians and priests and ministers, and forces women into abortions and sterilizations. Let's give them money and capital and access to our markets." That's sad, isn't it? But again, same mentality prevails. What the communists want, the communists get during the Clinton era.

Now, I will not dwell too long, though, on the fact that where permanent MFN status for China is concerned, there are, sadly, a great many Republicans willing to do the same little dance.

But it's typical of Clinton. I mean, he went out of the way to make sure they got our secrets. Right? That's in case they weren't moving fast enough to develop the nuclear arsenal with which to destroy our cities. We are charitable people. And this administration, out of, I guess, compassion for the Communist Chinese government, felt we that ought to give them a helping hand! {LAUGHTER}

So, we looked the other way when they walked off with our nuclear secrets and with technology that was needed to beef up the accuracy of their missiles, and the capital that was needed to make sure they could apply the technology faster! {LAUGHTER}

So, when we get into a spat in the next century with the Communist Chinese, and the missiles are coming across and blowing up our cities, those of us who are here will at least have the satisfaction of knowing it's a proof of good old American know-how. {LAUGHTER}

Yeah, all together too typical of the Clinton administration. So, it's right that we should want them gone, that we should want to bring this era to an end before it brings our Republic to a close.

But, in these good economic times, how are we to do that? I would feel pretty well hopelessly discouraged by this, but for one thing. But for one thing--and it's a big one. This administration may be presiding over economic times that are pretty good. It may have locked on to a situation where, as a result of the fruits of the many years of courageous and clear leadership, we got during the Reagan era. They may be reaping the fruits of world of peace, a world cleared of dangerous Communist adversaries in the Soviet Union. And that may, in fact, be a time in which he presides--but when we look at the areas for which he is responsible, when we look at the areas where his Democratic buddies circled the wagons around his shameless lying, lack of integrity, his betrayal of his oath, his assault on the Constitution of the United States, what we find is whatever the material condition of this country, this era has been characterized by the greatest betrayal of this nation's moral character, and moral decency, and moral principle that we have ever seen in the history of our country! {APPLAUSE}

But there are some reasons why some complacent and indifferent Americans might just let this all chug along. I think there are even more compelling reasons why Americans of decent heart and conscience would rise up in order to clean house, in order to make sure that we do not have to live continually with the ongoing stench of their moral corruption and turpitude. But what that suggests, my friends, is that in the course of this upcoming election, I don't think we're going to see a contest that, at least from a Republican point of view, turns in its prospects on material proposals on what we do about this or that--even issues that, in the past, were salient for us, like taxes, and which I believe are really important when we understand the real nature of those issues. I don't think they're going to be cutting edge issues for Republicans this fall.

And I'll have to tell you that speculation like that is already going on in the liberal media. A while back, I saw an article in the Washington Post in which they were talking about how the state tax, on right and left were in agreement now that under the present tax laws, Americans were paying effective tax rates that were 10% or below. How many of you feel like that? {LAUGHTER} Well, that's what they said in this article. And they cited polls that showed that, in terms of these proposals waiting to come forth, "I'm going to give you this in taxes, and that in taxes, and we're gong to have a tax cut and give money to people." Apparently, for whatever reason--either because they are flush right now, and don't care that much for this marginal income, or because they no longer believe in these phony promises--Americans are not being moved by this prospect, by the tax cuts and all these things that used to give some ground for Republican politicians.

Now, I've got to tell you, might come as a shock to you, but I'm kind of glad that's true. I am. And I'm glad it's true, because I'm sick to death of this phony manipulation of the tax issue. I really am. {APPLAUSE}

I thought of it during the course of the debates, and I'd sit there, and I'd listen to my colleagues, and you'd have this one over here saying, "My plan is going to get $1800 to pay for . . . ," "My plan will give more money to middle class section," "My plan will give more money to this one and that one." "I'm going to give more money to you. Vote for me." And when I got the floor and had an opportunity to address it, I always liked to look audiences in the eye and say, "Look, wait an minute here, before you get all excited about what these politicians are offering to do for you, why don't you step back and ask yourself a simple question? Whose money is it anyway?" {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE}

I mean, here we have these guys engaged in this wonderful competition, in order to do what? They're engaged in a competition to see whether or not you're going to be galled into voting for them because they're going to give you a smidgen of your own money back. {LAUGHTER} And this is supposed to come as some wonderful, grand gesture on their part which we should fall down on our knees and thank "massa politician" and "massa government" for giving us the fruits of our own hard earned labor, telling us that we now have a surplus in the budget. This is great.

I was asked this question, in fact, on the radio coming in, in terms of the surplus and what ought to be done with it. And I'll have to say what I said and have said many times before. Think about it this way. You go into the local car dealer and you purchase an automobile. You take it home and a few months later you get a letter from the car dealer that says, "We've just been going over the books. And we find that you've overpaid for that vehicle by $5,000." And then they say, "And we're going to have a meeting tomorrow to decide whether and how much of it we'll going to give back to you." {LAUGHTER}

Now, how many of you would be overjoyed at the prospect that your car dealer was actually thinking about giving you a little of your money back--while, of course, investing the rest in whatever they saw fit? So, why do we let politicians get away with this?

First, we have them raiding the Social Security Trust Fund, and all this--taking money out of the purpose it was intended for, using it to build up their patronage coffers, expand the government in all kind of ways it that shouldn't have been done in any case. Okay, now, we come to a time of a little greater economic opportunity, perhaps. They say, "Well, we've got this surplus," and it's starting to emerge now, even despite the Social Security Trust Fund. In fact, for several years they were claiming surpluses that really came out the Trust Fund, but we're actually getting into the period where the surpluses are going to be even in excess, but they're still taken from the Trust Fund. Okay. Until we come to this time when they're claiming these surpluses, what do they say? "Well, we're going to debate whether or not we'll give you what you overpaid for government services." So, whether we overpaid for government services, this is an opportunity for politicians, and not for us? It's an opportunity for them to decide what they shall do with that money to further structure us into subjection with welfare-style programs and other programs intended to make us dependent--where they really take tax issues, and by dribbling and drabbling them out in terms of targeted tax cuts and other things, they will again even use an issue as tax cuts to turn us into serfs and wage-slaves of the government. {APPLAUSE}

Is this the way it's supposed to be? That's why I believe that this isn't the real tax issue. The real tax issue, when you look at the heritage of this nation and when you understand where we're coming from, the real tax issue is not understood until you go back and realize that the present system of income taxation at the federal level is one that would not have been constitutional under the original Constitution of the United States. Do you realize that? Couldn't have done it. Couldn't have done it. That's why they claimed that to pass the 16th Amendment, in order to make it constitutional for the federal government to impose an income tax. Because, the way our Founders wrote the Constitution, such a direct tax on the income of individuals could not constitutionally be imposed.

Now, why do you think that was? Do you think the Founders of this country just didn't understand about all the different possibilities of taxation? Far from it. They had been subjects of one of the most greedy and rapacious monarchies in the history of the world, that had, through all their various means, come up every possible form of taxation, in order to wring an extra penny out of the British people. They knew all about income taxation and every other form of taxation. They rejected that taxation at the federal level, because they did not think it compatible with liberty and self-government to hand that kind of control over our national income to the national government. {APPLAUSE} They say this because it's not compatible with liberty.

I, frankly, don't understand why we think it is. It's not very hard to think through where we are under this tax system. A little hint of it ought to come from the fact that one of the early advocates of a national income tax, in terms of political organization, was Karl Marx. {LAUGHTER} And, in fact, he and Engels in the tracts that they wrote in the 1830's, 40's, late 30's, 40's, and they were laying out the program of socialism, communism, and how you achieve it--one of the key pillars of that agenda was the imposition of a national income tax.

Now, why? Well, because they understood that if you had that kind of an income tax, it in principle hands control of your money over to the government--and, of course, they were into government control of money and means of production and everything else. That's what they thought was good.

And here in the 20th century we have valiantly fought, we say, against socialism and communism. We have defeated the great shadow of evil that was over there in the Soviet Empire, in order to drive socialism as a specter from the future destiny of human kind. Now, meanwhile, we have adopted one of the main premises of socialism as part of our own structure for financing the government--and it's not, sadly, the only feature of socialism that we have adopted, but it may be one of the most salient ones. And it's obvious, of course, that it hands control of our money to the government.

I mean, you think about it. I make a deal with you that I'm going to let you have control of a certain percentage of my income. Sound good? Only to people who don't know how little income I make. {LAUGHTER} Okay, so, but in addition to that, I'm going to let you decide what percentage that will be. Sound good? Now, if you put two and two together, and I have given you control over a certain percentage of my income, and you decide what the percentage will be, how much of my money, in principle, do you control? {LAUGHTER} How much, how much? All of it. Every last penny of it is under your control. If I am going to turn over to you a certain percentage of my income, and you get to determine what that percentage will be, well, then I've turned over to you the authority to make it 100%, if you feel like it. That is what we do with the income tax.

And then we have nerve to be surprised when the politicians start talking as if all the money belongs to them, and they're doing us a favor when they let us keep any. Why do they talk that way? Because, under the income tax system, that's the truth. In principle, all our national income is controlled by them; and, if we get even a little bit of it, that is, I guess, due either to the goodness of their hearts, or their fear that if they turn the heat up too soon the frog will jump out of the pot.

The fact that they intend to turn it up and boil us to economic death ought to be clear, though--even in these moral times when our revulsion against this system has produced a little momentary respite in what had been a constant and ever spiraling increase in the government's control of our money.

So, I think that the key issue that confronts us in taxation is not how much they're going to give to us. No. Because that keeps us within the same syndrome where we're being manipulated by their control. If we want to restore real self-government in America, if we want to put ourselves back in a position of being a sovereign people, then we need to remember what Blackstone said, and what our Founders deeply understood: "The power over someone's resources is a power over their will." Give control over your resources to your national government, and that government undermines and controls your will and destroys your choice, and, therefore, destroys real self-government! {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE}

There is only one solution to that. There is only one solution. It's clear, it's good. We need to return to the original Constitution of this country. {APPLAUSE} We don't need to flatten the income tax. We don't need to reform the income tax. We don't need to restructure the income tax. We don't need to simplify the income tax. We need to abolish the income tax! {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} And return to the situation of freedom intended for our people. {APPLAUSE} That's the truth of it.

And I'm glad to say I have been campaigning on this premise through, now, almost two presidential election cycles. I started back in '96. And I would say that we needed to abolish the income tax, and people would sit there looking at me as if to say, "And here we thought you were sane . . ." {LAUGHTER} "Just when we were thinking you were making sense, you come up with a crazy proposal like this." Frankly, folks have begun come to look at the truth of it, begun to realize that, yes, death and taxes are inevitable, but not income taxes. Right? These are not inevitable--and, in fact, they were not intended to be a tool in the hands of the national government. It is one of those things which we handed to them that has been used and abused to undermine and destroy what ought to be the federal nature of our Constitution, and the ability of individuals, in fact, to control the destiny of family and community and state. Time and again in all areas of our lives, sadly, we are seeing that kind of surrender of self-government.

Not only where the money is concerned, but also where the schools are concerned, where we're more and more allowing the national government to move in and take over control of education--and it's not because it produces better results, you have noticed that, right? {LAUGHTER} When we want the best results, we get the best results from those institutions that are structured in such a way as to maximize the involvement, participation, power, and responsibility of the parents, who have, before God, the first responsibility for their children. {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} These are the kinds of things that we need to be aware of and wary of as we face the future, because they suggest a real destruction of our liberty in this country. I'm not just using that phrase "destruction of our liberty, destruction of our republic" in the abstract. And I am not predicting, either, that it's something that's going to happen. My friends, it is happening. It is already far advanced.

We can see that again, in terms of the assault of our Second Amendment rights. You've noticed that, too, I suppose--where, more and more, every time an incident of violence occurs in America now, politicians come forward and say, "Since these bad people have used violence, these good people must be deprived of their weapons." {LAUGHTER} You do, I guess, see the logic of that? Because if you do, I wish you would enlighten me. {LAUGHTER} But nothing about the gun control agenda has ever struck me as that logical anyway, since they keep telling us, among other things, "We ought to get these guns out of the hands of criminals." So, how are you going to do that? "Well, we're going to pass more laws against having these guns." I'm sitting here thinking to myself, "Now, let me think here. What is the simple definition of a criminal? Somebody who breaks the law." {LAUGHTER} So, by definition, if you're a criminal, you're somebody where for whom the laws aren't very efficacious. They really don't have an effect on your behavior. {LAUGHTER} So you can proliferate laws till the cows come home, you're not going to affect the behavior of criminals.

The thing about criminals is that they ignore and break laws. {LAUGHTER} So, when somebody comes to you and says we're going to pass a law to deal with this criminal behavior, you tell them, no. No, we send out the police and we enforce the laws we've got, to deal with criminal behavior. {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} Don't come to me and tell me, "I've got to take away your means of self-defense. I've got to ignore your basic and fundamental God-given right to defend family and person and property."

That's what it is, you know. I realize that the folks at the ACLU try to pretend that our rights come from our Bill of Rights, but as I often ask school kids who will give me that response when I ask them where our rights come from, I say, "Well, the Founders of this country who wrote the Bill of Rights fought a revolution in the name of their rights. The Bill of Rights hadn't been written yet, so where did their rights come from?" {LAUGHTER}

This gets me to what is, in fact, the main point of what I have to say tonight. Faced with this threat to our freedom--which I think is epitomized by the assaults and the degradation of the Clinton era--we really have to ask ourselves what we do, how we meet this challenge, and what, in fact, is the key to understanding it and dealing with it. And in the end, I think that key can be understood, if we really see what we're looking at in these Clinton years.

It was not an accident that the key crisis of this administration did not come in an area of economic management or international cares--however incompetent and egregious the betrayals we suffered in some of those areas. No. It came in the area of a clear and unprecedented lack of moral character and integrity. And I don't think that's an accident.

I think, in fact, the Clinton era is representing to us the fundamental, the root danger that we face right now as a people. The reason that more and more of our rights are being undermined, the reason that we are surrendering more and more of the aspects of self-government, is that we are allowing the destruction of character and conscience, and undermining the sense that we are fit to be a free people. And the Clinton era exemplifies that assault. As clear as day, we can see that that lack of character, that ever-increasing corruption of character, is not just affecting, but it is undermining, paralyzing, destroying the integrity of our institutions of self-government at the highest level.

And I don't just limit that, by the way, to Bill Clinton's lying and his moral turpitude, and all. I don't just mean that his constitutional betrayal. No. But what I think really exemplifies the loss of integrity in our... 

{COMMENT="Recording interrupted"}

-- our entitlement to all our rights that all men are created equal and endowed, not by the Bill of Rights, or the Constitution, or the laws, or the or the judges, or the courts; endowed by their Creator, endowed by God Almighty with our inalienable rights. {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} And if God is the source of our rights, then the authority of God must be respected in the exercise of those rights, or they will be destroyed. See, that's where we've gone wrong. We have lost the sense of our moral foundation.

And you know the issue that epitomizes it? I know I don't have to tell many of you this, because I know Idaho. It is still true, but we need to understand how important it is, because the issue that epitomizes this more than any other is this issue where we have come forward and lied to people--our women in this society--told them that against a clear, explicit premise on which our whole way of life is based is that they have the right to reach into the womb and snuff out that innocent life found therein, on the basis of their role of convenience and choice. This can't be true. Either our rights come from God, or they come from our mother's choice. And if they come from a human choice, then the whole premise of our republic has been discarded and overturned. That's where we are right now.

It's one of the reasons that I often tell people that, in one sense, you know, that our republic is already dead, and what we're going to decide is whether we're going to wake up in time to help to recover and restore its life. Because, that which is the soul of it, that which is the living principle of truth from which our self-government is derived, we have already, in these court decisions like Roe vs. Wade, abandoned it. We must get back to that moral ground, or the lack of it will destroy our character and open the door through which we destroy ourselves.

I think that's the key challenge that we face today. I don't think that there's anything more important than that. And what is interesting is that we've now come to a juxtaposition of challenges, because on the one hand we have this challenge to America to restore our sense of moral principle and integrity, and on the other, we have the challenge to the Republican Party to win an election in the fall. And there is only one hope for us in that election. It is not the material competition, it is not all the issues that involves money and material security. The only hope we have of victory in these booming economic times is to drive home the point of the Democrats' moral betrayal. If we do not meet the moral challenge that faces America, then we cannot meet the political challenge that faces us in November. {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} 

In some ways, it's a remarkable situation. It's one of those things that, if I didn't already deeply reveal a belief in God, it would sure lead me in that direction. You've got to know in a situation like this, the only way that you can get this done is to do what's right for your country. If you don't do what's right for America, you can't do what's right for yourselves. I love it. It just has a wonderful ring of truth to it. But it also has a deep and ominous implication for the future of our nation.

Now, the question we must seriously ask ourselves--and I know that at moment I ask it with some risk to my so-called political fortunes, but I still think it has to be raised. Because I look at what's been going on in terms of this whole process we've been through in the course of the last several months to choose the Republican nominee for president--and I want you just to consider carefully, clearly, given the nature of the challenge we've faced, given the fact that we must go forward in November, and we must articulate the moral crisis of the nation, defeat the Democrats on the basis of that area where they are truly vulnerable given their utter and egregious betrayal of America's moral principles and decency.

How many of you can honestly say that you survey the political scene and you think that the way things are shaping up in the nominating process that we are going to have the most effective champion for making that point in November? Do you really think so? That's one of those things that worries me deeply. And as we work through the rest of this process, we're going to be tempted down at the convention, and so forth--we have some people coming forward already, saying, "If you want victory, you're going to have to get rid of the pro-life plank. If you want victory, you're going to have to put Tom Ridge or some other pro-abortion person on your ticket." I'll tell you clearly, straight in the front. I believe that if we make that error, if we think we're going to achieve victory by compromising on those very moral principles, when we ought to be standing up to defend against those Democrats who are destroying them, then we will lose, and we will deserve, by God, to lose. {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE}

And we will lose, because if we go down that road, we'll be failing our nation, failing our character, failing our heritage, failing our children, failing ourselves, failing that vision of hope for human dignity and self-government that this nation is supposed to represent. And I, frankly, don't think that God or the American people will reward that kind of betrayal and lack of integrity with a victory at the polls. We'll see.

So, I think that as Republicans and as Americans we need to commit ourselves, unequivocally, now, to place this moral challenge at the top of our agenda; to resolve that we shall make it a point with our votes, with our words, with everything we do to encourage the nation to address this challenge; to restore in our policies that respect for the moral foundations of our nation's life, without which we cannot sustain our character--and having restored that character, that we will move to restore our control over our money, over our schools, over our communities, over our lives, so that we can, in fact, hand on to new generations, intact and in full bloom, the blessings of liberty.

I believe that that's what we need to be about this fall. I guess that's why I'm still out here talking to people, because it's never too late, at least in terms of the commitment we're willing to make in this regard. Key decisions will have to be taken in the weeks ahead before we get to the fall, and I think we need as many people standing up whether in the votes, in the voting booths that are left in the primaries, or in the votes in the convention that's going to be held, and making it clear that the Republican Party must stand firm in its championing of those moral principles and positions which are the key to our nation's better destiny.

And that is what I would appeal to you, in fact, to enlist to do as you approach decisions that are still to be taken here in Idaho. I think that this nation needs to have a party that will clearly and effectively represent the great moral principles of our founding. I have believed all my life that that party is the Republican Party. But we've come to a time that will test that belief. And I think what we need to be clear on is that, if the party meets the challenge, then I think it will go on not only to victory in the fall, but to greater and greater things--because it is working on behalf of this nation's true heritage.

On the other hand, if we don't lead it, then millions of Americans who might otherwise be our supporters and be encouraged by our leadership will turn away from us. And in that turning away, they will destroy the party's prospects of any victory whatsoever. And some people will say, "Does this mean you want the Democrats to win?" I don't want any of this, see. I want the party to stay right where it belongs, and I'll fight to keep it there. But the fact that I want something doesn't mean that it can be produced by lies, and by compromises with truth and integrity. It can't be. And the folks who come forward to suggest that somehow or another it will be are simply digging the pit into which the party will fall. I won't have it. {APPLAUSE} I won't have it.

In that regard, and understanding that challenge, I would ask for prayers, and I'd asked for your help, and I'd ask for your determination to be part of that coalition of folks within the Republican party who are going to fight to make sure it stays on the solid ground of American moral principles--to offer the kind of leadership that will not only offer to the American people the prospect that Gore and Clinton and all their moral turpitude will be gone, but that those who will replace them will replace them in the spirit of those true moral principles that will raise the standard of our hope for the better destiny of this world on high. Where Reagan raised it, and where it truly belongs. God bless you. Thank you. {SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} 

{/speech} 
