{title} Remarks at the APEC CEO Summit {/title}
{event} Remarks at the APEC CEO Summit, Hanoi, Vietnam {/event}
{speaker} Condoleezza Rice {/speaker}
{date} November 18, 2006 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you for that overly generous introduction and I bring you greetings on behalf of President Bush, who is currently attending the first session of the APEC Leaders. I'd also like to thank the organizers of this year's CEO Summit, and of course our hosts here in Vietnam, the Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry. Before I go any further, let me extend a special note of gratitude to the government and the people of Vietnam because I know that it must have been an extraordinary effort to put on this summit, but their hospitality and hard work is paying off. And I have to note, too, I've never seen a friendlier people than the people of Vietnam. So thank you very much. {APPLAUSE}

Fellow ministers, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: It is my great pleasure to join all of you here in Hanoi for this year's APEC summit. The United States views APEC as the premier multilateral organization in the Asia-Pacific region. And here in this room today, we see the true spirit of APEC - in people like you, and millions of other entrepreneurs across the Asia-Pacific, who work every day to create jobs, to expand opportunity, and to unleash the energy and the imagination of the Asia-Pacific community.


The United States has always been a Pacific power, and we are proud to support and be a part of Asia's success. We have opened our markets to Asia's entrepreneurs. We have opened our schools and universities to Asia's students. And as a former provost, I can tell you that we have not only through that enriched Asia by educating young people, but we have enriched America by their presence and interaction with American students and universities. And of course, we have opened our communities to people across this region. In 1989, we and our Pacific partners joined together to create this great organization, APEC.


The results of our cooperation have been dramatic: Since the creation of APEC, the combined wealth of our economies has grown by 66 percent. Today, nearly two-thirds of all U.S. trade occurs with our friends in the Asia-Pacific. And the benefits on this side of the ocean are plain for all to see: People in this region are lifting themselves out of poverty, in greater numbers and with greater speed, than ever before in human history.


The lesson, ladies and gentlemen, is clear: The economies of the Asia-Pacific region are completely and inextricably linked together. We share the benefits, as well as the burdens, of expanding prosperity. For this reason, APEC, and the free economies of the Asia-Pacific, should know that they have no better friend, and no stronger supporter, than the United States of America.


Today, I would like to share America's vision for APEC with you. It is a vision that transcends simple cooperation, and looks to the emergence of a true Asia-Pacific Economic Community, spanning the public sphere and the private sector. I see several principles that must define that sense of community.


We must create opportunities for sustainable growth. There is simply no better way to achieve this goal than free trade, and the United States has a comprehensive trade policy in the Asia-Pacific.


Our trade policy priority is to successfully conclude the Doha Round of global trade negotiations. At the same time, we are actively working to advance free trade with all willing partners, especially here in the region. At present, more than 50 preferential trade arrangements are completed or still under negotiation in the Asia-Pacific. I know that many of you would like the network of trade to become better integrated and more rationalized. We would too, and we are working with our APEC partners, and with you in the business community, to promote regional economic integration, including the possibility of a Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific.


In order to foster trade, we must also facilitate interaction and travel. Therefore, the United States has decided this year to recognize the APEC Business Travel Card, as the first step toward joining the program. This will enable entrepreneurs like you to gain visas, to move through our immigration lines, and to visit America - in a faster, safer, and easier manner. {APPLAUSE} I know, everywhere I go I hear about the visa issues. {LAUGHTER} Let me assure you that the United States of America wants to be open, open and secure, but open to a free flow of people, just as we want to be open to the free flow of goods. And I am sure that this step forward with the APEC Business Travel Card will benefit all businesses in the region, including American ones.


Our sense of economic community must also confront threats to our prosperity. A consensus is emerging in the Asia-Pacific that security is an essential condition of development. If natural disasters can cripple entire nations in a single day ? if the specter of pandemic disease continues to haunt our societies ? if violent extremists and weapons traffickers can exploit peaceful networks of commerce to advance their nefarious agendas - then our economies face a grave danger, and it is those on the margins of society, the poor and the disenfranchised, who are at risk of suffering most.


Our sense of economic community must promote well-governed societies. Just as APEC is increasingly recognizing that prosperity depends on security, we are also acknowledging the connection between development and good governance. More and more entrepreneurs are sick and tired of bearing the economic risks of political malfeasance - and for good reason. Who wants to do business in an economy where the rule of law is enforced by whim or perhaps not at all? Or where the state is compromised by corruption? Or where the intellectual products of innovation can be pirated at any cost?


This is an area in which we must work together, because corruption and the absence of the rule of law will most certainly retard economic growth, both for growing, developed economies and also for those who wish to enter the international economic system and gain benefit and prosperity for their people.


Finally, our sense of economic community must strengthen our shared institutions. On this front, the United States will lead by example. Over the next two years, President Bush plans to increase America's funding for APEC - to empower this organization to meet the challenges of the 21st century.


Let me just say one more thing about the idea of a community in the Asia-Pacific. I find it really remarkable, as the American Secretary of State, to be standing here in Hanoi, barely three decades after the tragic war between our countries, and yet our conversation today is not about conflict, it's about community, it's about progress. {APPLAUSE} One has to ask: How is this possible?


Well, in fact, the answer is really pretty simple and it is an answer about the triumph of the human spirit and an answer about the triumph of human desire to overcome difficulty: Twenty years ago, the leaders of Vietnam took a hard look at their isolated economy, and they made a strategic choice to begin reforms. As Vietnam sought to create opportunities for its people, it has found a friend in the United States - a friend who has continued, and will continue, to raise our issues of concern, issues of human rights and religious freedom, but a friend nonetheless. We have supported Vietnam's good decisions and worked to bind up old wounds. We have opened our markets to Vietnamese goods and joined in its fight against AIDS. We are helping Vietnam to enter the World Trade Organization and, hopefully very soon, we will extend Permanent Normal Trade Relations to Vietnam. {APPLAUSE} But most of all, the United States and Vietnam, of course, have restored diplomatic relations, but they have restored more than that. They restored a hopeful partnership and a hope for the people of Vietnam and America to work towards a better future.


Now, this case of Vietnam is instructive - for it shows how the past can be overcome to the benefit of countries. It dhows that one does not have to be captive of the past, but that you can look to the future. There are other countries with which we hope to overcome difficult circumstances, too. The United States continues to look to the day when cooperation is possible with Burma and with North Korea. So far, these governments have chosen to reject the path of cooperation - violating their agreements and isolating their countries from the prosperity of the region. But if the leaders of Burma and North Korea were to follow the example of Vietnam and the example of other adversaries throughout history who have overcome their adversarial history, if they make the strategic choice and take the necessary steps to join the international community, it will open a new path of peace and opportunity. And nothing will be better for the people of those countries than their integration into an international community that I can assure you would welcome them, too, to a future of hope and prosperity. Together, we could then all realize the promise of a true community in the Asia-Pacific region.


Building this APEC sense of community will take time, and patience, but we can already see it emerging, and we already know the principles that define our partnership: Freedom of navigation, freedom of trade, freedom of exchange, and the freedom of all people to live under laws of their own making. These ideas are inspiring and empowering hundreds of millions of men and women, all around the Pacific Rim, to build new lives of hope and opportunity. This is a source of optimism for an organization that represents countries in the great sweep from the tip of South America all the way through Northeast Asia. And it will be the greatest source of strength as we transform APEC from a forum of cooperation to a true and lasting community.


Thank you very much for everything that you do every day to bring hope and peace and prosperity to so many people around the world, and thank you for what you are doing to strengthen this great organization. Thank you, and I would now like to take a few questions. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
