{title} Remarks at Espacio USA Conference {/title}
{event} Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, DC {/event}
{speaker} Condoleezza Rice {/speaker}
{date} May 5, 2006 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Feliz Cinco de Mayo. {APPLAUSE} That I must say with a Russian accent. I'm sorry about that. {LAUGHTER}

I want to thank you, Hector, for you very kind introduction and also for your work. Over the years I've know all that you do. I want to thank three people who have been essential to making this year's forum possible, of course, Luis Alberto Moreno. Thank you, Luis Alberto. We've been good friends for a long time. Thank you. To Emilio Azcarraga, thank you. {APPLAUSE} And to Gaston Melo, thank you very much. {APPLAUSE}

Now, I just heard a fantastic presentation by Leticia and by Jesus. And it was fantastic because it was passionate and it was sound and it was well thought out and I know that they mean it when they say we must do it. And I want to spend a few moments talking about what it is we must do and then I want to answer your questions.

I am, by profession, a university professor, and so even though I spend my time usually speaking to business groups and to government officials, it's really when I have a chance to be with young people like you, the future leaders of the Americas, that I really enjoy the experience. And I just want to tell you that I'm so proud of you for what you have done in working for the last couple of days to bring about this declaration. I've been told how hard you've been working, how much discussion and debate and argumentation it has taken. What better way than to produce this wonderful document.

And I would just leave you with the following thoughts. What is it that we're trying to build here in the Americas? What is that we're trying to build here in what was once referred to as the New World? Well, obviously, first of all, we want to build societies that are democratic. Why do we want to build societies that are democratic? Because as difficult as it is to build democracy, it's worth it. Only in democracy, where you are able to say what you think, to worship as you please, to educate your children, both boys and girls, most importantly to choose those who are going to govern you, only in democracy, that kind of system, can human beings reach their full potential.

I've studied all kinds of systems around the world, and I can tell you that if it's not a democracy, it's not going to be a place where everyone can reach his or her potential. So we want a democratic hemisphere, but we don't just want a democratic hemisphere on paper. We want a true democratic hemisphere in which people have the means and the ability to express themselves and to freely associate and to get together in nongovernmental institutions and to press their cause and to hold their governments accountable. So we want real democracy in this hemisphere, where democracy is really working.

And of course, if democracy is really working, people are going to have high expectations of their governments to deliver; to deliver an opportunity for development, an opportunity for jobs, an opportunity for health and education. In democracies people hold their governments accountable for a better way of life. And indeed, if we have one problem these days in the hemisphere, in the Americas, it is that democratic governments borne of the difficult time of the 1980s -- before, of course, all of you were born, but let me tell you, the 1980s, a time of juntas and a time of civil wars, a time of authoritarian governments -- this hemisphere has given way to democratic governments.

But those democratic governments have had a hard time delivering for their people. And people are getting impatient and they're saying, "What is democracy doing for my children and what is it doing for my family and what is it doing for my aspirations?" And we have to have an answer for that and I look forward to working with President Moreno on exactly those kinds of issues because I know that he cares that the Inter-American Development Bank will be able to contribute to making governments capable of helping their people.

The United States wants to be a partner in the creation of better opportunities in Latin America through strong democratic governments that can deliver. I want you to know something, that the United States, under President Bush, has doubled official development assistance to Latin America. Doubled it. I want you to know that through the Millennium Challenge Account, which now has compacts with Honduras, soon we hope with El Salvador and with other countries of the region, that we are making available large resources for the creation of infrastructure that, for instance, will allow rural farmers to have roads to bring their product to market.

I want you to know that we believe in free trade in the hemisphere and that we have signed free trade agreements with a number of countries -- Peru and Colombia and with Central America -- so that free trade can help to create jobs.

And I want you to know that we have done with this Chile. I want you to know that we've done this and it hasn't mattered whether a government comes from the left or from the right. The United States doesn't have an ideological price for partnership. What we care is that from whatever side of the political spectrum a government comes, that it is governing democratically and that is it delivering for its people. Because once you're elected democratically, you have an obligation to govern democratically.

We want, too, also to recognize that there are still too many marginalized people in this hemisphere -- people who are indigenous peoples, people who have come from parts of the communities and have not had full access. And we have to deal with this in our hemisphere. There have been times in the United States of America when populations were marginalized. I come myself from a community and a population that was long marginalized. And so I know that no democracy is truly a democracy unless people from all walks of life and from all ethnic groups and from all religious backgrounds really believe that they have access to be whatever they can be.

Now, a government can't deliver for populations. It can create conditions. But people have to want to achieve. And what I see in you and what I see in the many immigrants who come to the United States of America is people who want to achieve. You are going to be the future of a hemisphere that can achieve greatness. We, those of us now in positions of responsibility, need to lay a foundation so that you have something to work with when I'm sure you come to power in some way or another.

I want you to know that the United States of America believes in this partnership that we are forging as peoples of the hemisphere. But it won't happen without the dedicated devotion of people like you who continue to work to better this hemisphere.

I said that the Americas is not just an alliance of governments; it's an alliance of peoples. It's also an alliance of young people. And that's why I'm really glad that you are here and thank you for the work you've been doing. {APPLAUSE}

Now let me take a few questions. Can folks get to a microphone so I can take a few questions? Come on, don't be shy. I'll start calling on people. {LAUGHTER} No, there we go. {LAUGHTER} 

{/speech}
