{title} Remarks at the State Department Correspondents Association's Inaugural Newsmaker Breakfast {/title}
{event} State Department Correspondents Association's Inaugural Newsmaker Breakfast {/event}
{speaker} Condoleezza Rice {/speaker}
{date} January 5, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Well, good morning. I want to start by answering the question that I know is on everybody's mind, and that is: Did I watch the game last night despite the late hour? The truth of the matter is I fell asleep at halftime and then got up and watched the last part of the last quarter. And one of the reasons that Jim Wilkinson is a little bleary-eyed is, like most Texans, he was up celebrating late. But I just want to say to another Texan to whom I've already spoken this morning, "Hook 'em horns," or whatever it is that they say. {LAUGHTER}


It has been, in fact, almost a year since I became Secretary, about three weeks from a year, and it's been an extraordinary year, it's been an exciting year, a year that I've enjoyed very much. I want to take a minute to thank the State Department correspondents, but especially our traveling crew, because we have been on some real adventures, we have been on some misadventures like Sudan, we have been a crew that started out to go to one place and ended up going someplace else. And through all of it, you have showed good humor and grace, and I want to thank you for that. And I hope it will be as exciting a year next year as it -- this year as it was last year.


I thought I'd just spend just a couple of moments talking about how I see the agenda for the next several months and then to take any questions you have. I want to be very short in what I do. Let me divide my remarks into a couple of policy issues that I think will be obviously very critical, and then a couple of issues that we are working at the Department that I hope will get some attention, because I think they're very important to the future of the Department, the future of the way that we engage in the war of ideas and the way that we engage in public diplomacy.


Obviously, last year and now this year, probably the dominant story in foreign policy has been the changing Middle East. I noted a few days ago when I was watching CNN that there actually is a series about the Middle East and it starts with, "The Middle East is Changing." And I think I would make the argument that indeed the Middle East is changing and changing very dramatically. The President, in his Inaugural Address, Second Inaugural Address, made very clear that it was going to be the policy of the United States to insist that the policies that we followed worldwide about liberty and freedom would also be pursued in the Middle East, and I think something has been unleashed in the Middle East.


Obviously, this next year will be very important in Iraq. I think we are all watching and speaking -- I'm speaking with Zal Khalilzad frequently about the process of government formation that will begin in earnest once the vote count is certified. But what I would like to focus on on Iraq is that we will have, for the first time now, a permanent government in Iraq, a government that is not just there to set up the elections or set up a constitutional referendum, but now, a government that will have responsibility for governing. And it's obviously very important that that government be as broadly based as possible, that that government be as representative as possible, and that it be a government that represents a kind of national compact of the people of Iraq coming together.


It's not easy. These people have essentially, over their entire history, solved their problems by conflict and by coercion or repression. Now they're trying to do it by politics. But I just want to note that we really do look forward to working with this permanent government on issues like security, on issues like infrastructure, and particularly on the development of competent governmental structures, ministries at the national level and, at the provincial and local levels, organizations and governing councils that can actually deliver for the people. And that will be very much the focus of our diplomats.


When I talk about transformational diplomacy, which is a phrase you've all heard many, many times, what I really mean is that we're not so much in places like Kabul or Baghdad in the business of reporting on what other countries do; what we're in the business of doing is actually on the ground, helping to transform the capability of countries and of their people to self-govern. And I think there will be no greater example of that over the next several months than Iraq, where the competence of these governing structures will be extremely important.


Similarly, we've not lost sight of Afghanistan. The Afghans now have their permanent government in place, have been through their cycle of elections, but I think you will see increasing internationalization of that effort. You probably have noticed that NATO is taking a bigger role, probably taking on some of the area of the south, which allows American and other special forces to move to a more counterterrorism role.


But it's more than just what NATO is doing. There will be a meeting at the end of January in London, where I think we will look to how the international community replaces the commitment that was there in the Bonn agreement with a new way to move forward -- the international community and Afghanistan together. And obviously, the two big challenges are to do something about the drug trade, but also to do something about now starting to move Afghanistan to a sustainable economic system. It's a country that, after 25 years of civil war, essentially has no economic infrastructure, and I think we're going to have to recognize that if we don't want the economy to be drugs and foreign assistance, then there's going to have to be a lot of attention given to building a sustainable economic system.


And that means that we will need to look at Afghanistan in its regional context. When I was in Central Asia, I was very much struck that the countries of Kyrgyzstan, of Kazakhstan, even of Tajikistan, very much see Afghanistan as a part of the region that is Central Asia. One of the things that we did in the State Department was to move the Central Asian republics out of the European bureau, which really was an artifact of their having been states of the Soviet Union, and to move them into the bureau that is South Asia, which has Afghanistan, India and Pakistan. And so I think it represents what we're trying to do, which is to think of this region as one that will need to be integrated, and that will be a very important goal for us.


That whole South Asia region I expect to be very high on my list of priorities. Enhancing the relationship with India will be extremely important. As you know, we believe the President will be visiting sometime this year, enhancing the relationship with India at the same time that we maintain a good relationship with Pakistan and help Pakistan in its efforts to fight extremism.


And as I said, moving up through Central Asia and Afghanistan, if you think about that region just a few years ago, prior to September 11th, it really was, as I think it was Zbigniew Brzezinski called it, an "arc of crisis." It's now, in many ways, an arc of opportunity, but we're going to have to work very hard in South Asia and I expect that to be very important.


Let me just move a little further to the southwest and talk about Iran, where, obviously, we are moving into a period of time with Iran where I think we're going to have to -- the world is going to have to make some decisions about whether or not it is possible to get a commitment from Iran to a civil nuclear structure that does not give them the technology for nuclear weapons. There, so far, has been no demonstration that the Iranians are willing to recognize the world's just concerns about the fuel cycle and its location in Iran.


There have been all kinds of attempts. Those attempts continue, but I would just remind that we have always said that if we're not able to get satisfaction somehow through a negotiated route, then diplomacy will continue, but in a different form, which is that we would expect there to be referral to the Security Council. And I think we want not to lose sight also with Iran of other activities that are troubling, not only Iran's internal development, which continues to go in a retrograde direction, but also Iran's continuing support for terrorism, which is of very great concern as we try and tackle the problems of the Middle East and as we try and deliver on the promise that is there with the Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon and democratization in Lebanon, and of course, as we continue to pursue, after the elections in the Palestinian territories, the peace process.


Let me just close this portion by -- I haven't had a chance personally, in a personal fashion, to say that we are all obviously greatly concerned for Prime Minister Sharon. We are all praying for his full recovery, along with the Israeli people. He is a man of enormous courage and I think that what we've seen over the last year is that he is also a man who has a vision of peace for the Israeli people that is based clearly on a bedrock commitment to security, but also on a growing realization that security also has to include a better future for the Palestinian people. And that continues to be a goal of all of us. But I just wanted to personally note that the Prime Minister, with whom I've had a chance to spend a lot of time, is really a wonderful and historic figure and we're all praying for his full recovery.


Finally, let me just say that when we talk about all of these areas -- and we can talk about other parts of the world in your questions, I won't try to go through the world or we'll be here till tonight -- but let me just mention a couple of things about the Department itself. The Department of State is a -- has a fantastic collection of people. I can't even tell you what a pleasure and a joy it is to work with the men and women of the State Department. I often said that these were people that I had -- people like I had taught. They came into the Foreign Service and the Civil Service because they wanted to change the world. They didn't come into the Foreign Service and the Civil Service to sit still. And they now are in a time in history where we actually are having an effect on the world that is historic and will have enormous impact on how the world looks for the next many decades.


We have been -- I have been trying to tap into that spirit of innovation and that spirit of pushing forward, and the response has been really great. And the whole transformational diplomacy concept is really one that I think you'll start to see us talk more about this year.


What does it mean for American diplomacy but also for American diplomats to be people who are now more involved and more engaged in the lives of people in countries where our engagements look more like what we do in Kabul or what we do in the Philippines or what we do -- will do, hopefully -- in Haiti or what we're doing in Liberia, where it's a hands-on trying to help people create governing structures that work, rather than the way we sort of traditionally thought about the service, which is that you report on other countries, you demarche other countries. It's about, if you will, foreign relations between two sovereign states.


It's not that that's unimportant -- it still is -- but I think we're seeing that around the world we are more engaged now on the ground, hands on. And we're looking at what that means for the training of our people, we're at look at what that means for the deployment of our people, and I think it's going to be very exciting.


We're also trying to work on another part of the agenda that has been on everybody's mind, which is public diplomacy. And I just want to note, you know, that Karen Hughes has come to do that. I want to note that it's not just what you say about what the United States is doing. But today, this afternoon, we will have a summit of university presidents and I think there are about a 120 who are coming, and Margaret Spellings and I have invited them because the message that we want to send is that one of the great strengths of the United States in engaging the rest of the world has been our ability to be a place to which people come to train their young leaders. It's been a place that around the world people have wanted to come to study and be trained in the United States, and that when they go back, they go back as people who understand us better than we could ever hope to have people understand us by simply doing more broadcasting or more films or whatever.


And so I think you'll see us focus a lot, too, on exchanges and on the way that we engage the rest of the world. I'm really glad that these university presidents are coming. Later on this afternoon, the President is going to come and talk to them. He's a big proponent of exchange.


And so those are some of the things that are on my mind as we go into 2006. Thank you. 

{/speech}
