{title} Remarks with Malagasy President Marc Ravalomanana and Millennium Challenge Corporation Chief Executive Officer Paul Applegarth at Signing Ceremony for the Millennium Challenge Corporation's Compact With the Republic of Madagascar {/title}
{event} Benjamin Franklin Room, Washington, DC {/event}
{speaker} Condoleezza Rice {/speaker}
{date} April 18, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. Thank you, Paul, and welcome to the Benjamin Franklin Room, where today we are going to sign the first ever Millennium Challenge Account compact with the Republic of Madagascar.

It is a four-year, nearly $110 million program that we have designed together. Paul will return to the podium in a moment to tell you more about the compact, but let me first thank Paul and the MCC staff for the superb work that has been done on this compact that begins to transform President Bush's vision into a reality. And let me thank our Ambassador to Madagascar, Wanda Nesbitt and our current Ambassador, Jim McGee, our former Ambassador and our current Ambassador, Jim McGee, as well as their professional staffs, for help in developing this compact. This has truly been a partnership in coming to this day.

This is an historical occasion because it is a day we've all been waiting for. The Millennium Challenge Account is one of President Bush's signature initiatives. It is one that he had a personal interest in from the very beginning and it is integral to his foreign policy. That is why we wrote in the National Security Strategy that the twin processes of expanding the circle of development by opening societies and of building the infrastructure of democracy indeed go hand in hand.

The President has never separated international security, political freedom and economic prosperity into separate boxes. The vision is an integrated one and so is the strategy. We do not see development as a "soft issue" but as a core element of American foreign policy and of international security. And we do not see development as solely an economic challenge, but rather as a challenge that is fundamentally political in its origin.

Autocratic governments distort the market for political reasons. When outside observers see shocking inequality and exploitation in a country, some think that capitalism is to blame and conclude that more government intervention in the economy might be the cure. But what such countries really need is not more government but good government. What they need is not less free market but a truly free and undistorted market operating within the rule of law.

Economic systems work when access to opportunity is fair so that those with talent and drive can prosper. A vibrant economy requires, in turn, a political system in which citizens are free to participate so that they can ensure that their government is fair and wise and legitimate and accountable.

And we believe that a country with free political and economic systems is not going to collapse in failure and violence; it is not going to be the source of insecurity for its people, for the region in which it lives or for the world.

The MCA is based on this integrated understanding of how political freedom, economic growth and international security all support each other. We believe that international support for development will only defeat poverty if that support encourages sound economic and political institutions, if it leads governments to invest in their people, to trust their people and, above all, to free their people to work to their innate talents and aspirations.

As President Bush has said, the prosperity and social vitality and technological progress of a people are directly determined by the extent of their liberty. Freedom honors and unleashes human creativity and creativity determines the strength and the wealth of nations.

With us today is another president who understands this truth. President Marc Ravalomanana, it is really a pleasure to have you here. You know that foreign assistance that is truly effective is foreign assistance that makes itself obsolete. He knows that if a country needs and accepts foreign assistance year after year, decade after decade, something is wrong with that picture, that a country ought to be freeing itself of that need.

Now, I want to tell you that this is not, by any means, the first time that the President and I have met because not too long after the MCA was created we talked, and he said, "We are going to be an MCA country." And I said, "Well, you know, there are these criteria." And he said, "We're going to be an MCA country." {LAUGHTER} And you know what? You are an MCA country. {APPLAUSE}

Perhaps it's fitting that President Ravalomanana and his country are the first MCA recipients. The President started out his youth selling yogurt from the back of his bicycle and gradually he built his business into the largest Malagasy-owned enterprise in Madagascar. He was then elected mayor of a big city and actually had to govern that city. He knows the practical economics from the inside out and from the underside up. He's been there. He's seen it all. And that is why when he became President in 2002, he knew what to do and he knew how to do it.

Over the past three years, President Ravalomanana has spared no effort to put Madagascar's public financing on a sound basis and to uproot corruption. He's spared no effort to invest in health and education of the 16.5 million people of Madagascar, especially the young people. Madagascar's mean population age is only 17.5 years old.

President Ravalomanana has supported entrepreneurship and economic freedom. He has emphasized the importance of human rights and equal opportunity. Mr. President, you've made a difference and we hope now that our MCA partnership can make a difference for the people of Madagascar.

Thank you.

{APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
