{title} Vice President's Remarks and Q&A at a Town Hall Meeting in Oregon City, Oregon {/title}
{event} Town Hall Meeting in Oregon City, Oregon {/event}
{speaker} Dick Cheney {/speaker}
{date} September 17, 2004 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

{AUDIENCE} Four more years! Four more years! Four more years! {/AUDIENCE} 

Thank you. Be seated, please. Thank you very much. Thank you for singing to my granddaughter. That's never happened to me before. {LAUGHTER} Maybe when the election is over with we can go out.

But we're delighted to be here today, to be back in Oregon. We've been here a good deal in the last few months. And I'm delighted to come back. Oregon is an extraordinarily important location for us this year. We came close last time, and this time we're absolutely determined that we want to carry Oregon for the Bush-Cheney ticket. {APPLAUSE}

And I'm delighted to have Liz traveling with me this morning, filling in. Her mother usually does the introduction chores. And Daughter Mary also is traveling with us. She works -- she manages the vice presidential part of the campaign. And Liz is, among other things, helping with debate prep and making certain I don't make any mistakes. {LAUGHTER} And Lynne is not with us today because she had a major speech back in Washington today. I think it's Constitution Day, and she had to go down and participate in special ceremonies in Washington today, otherwise she'd be here.

But I often tell people that we have a marriage that came about as a result of Dwight Eisenhower's election as President of the United States in 1952, that in 1952, I was a youngster living with my folks in Lincoln, Nebraska. Dad worked for the Soil Conservation Service. And Eisenhower got elected, he reorganized the Agriculture Department. Dad got transferred to Casper, Wyoming, and that's where I met Lynne. We grew up together, went to high school, and a couple weeks ago marked our 40th wedding anniversary. {APPLAUSE} I explained to a group the other night that if it hadn't been for Eisenhower's election victory, Lynne would have married somebody else. {LAUGHTER} She said, right, and now he'd be Vice President of the United States. {LAUGHTER} And every woman here knows exactly what I mean, right? {LAUGHTER}

But we're embarked, obviously, on the final weeks of the campaign now. We had a great convention, I thought, in New York. It was a really tremendous event. {APPLAUSE} You think about it, I've done -- I guess, that was my eighth Republican National Convention now. And I've been to some pretty dull ones. {LAUGHTER} And some that were too exciting. But when you think about that line-up of speakers we had -- from John McCain and Rudy Guiliani and Arnold Schwarzenegger and Zell Miller, it really was -- {APPLAUSE} It was a remarkable week. And of course, I made it clear that I understand now that I do have an opponent. {LAUGHTER} That -- of course, everybody says John Kerry got elected because he's got great hair, he's good looking, charming, sexy. I said, how do you think I got the job. {LAUGHTER} Why do they always laugh at that, Liz? {LAUGHTER}

But anyway, it's -- this is one of those elections that I think -- well, obviously, I think it's important because my name is on the ballot. But more than that, as I look back throughout our history, I think this is a moment in time when as a nation we're making some basic fundamental decisions that we will live with, and that will be, in fact, sort of the foundation of how we do business for maybe 30 or 40 years into the future. I think back to the time right after World War II when we were faced suddenly with the prospect of the Cold War, the threat of the Soviet Union that had moved all the way into Central Europe after World War II. We had to put together a brand new strategy for dealing with that threat, and the whole concept of deterrence -- holding at risk the Soviet Society so they would not be tempted to launch an attack against us. We created NATO. We created the Central Intelligence Agency. We created the Department of Defense. All those things that happened in the late '40s, completely redesigned and rebuilt our military forces. And then we lived with that basic, fundamental national security strategy for the next 40 years, until ultimately we succeeded and prevailed in the Cold War. {APPLAUSE}

But I think the events of 9/11 and all that we've learned since indicate that we are in another similar sort of turning point, if you will, or watershed period in American history when once again we're having to develop and execute a new national security strategy to deal with the new threats -- because the old strategy doesn't work any more, and because the new threats are radically different from the ones we faced throughout the period of the Cold War.

I think back to 9/11, and what I'd like to do is talk a little bit about some of those basic issues here this morning, and then throw it open to questions. We can talk about this subject or anything else you might want to get into, as well, too. I think back to 9/11 and all that has transpired since, obviously, we learned on that day the vulnerability of the United States to a handful of terrorists coming into the country, taking advantage of the openness of our system, and arming themselves with knives and boarding passes and doing enormous damage -- mounting the worst attack ever by a foreign power on U.S. soil, when we lost 3,000 Americans that morning in New York and Washington and Pennsylvania.

And we've learned since that these terrorists, or the al Qaeda organization are trying to do everything they can to get the things on -- their hands on deadlier weapons, on chemical or biological agents, or perhaps, even a nuclear weapon if they could. And there's no doubt in anybody's mind -- there shouldn't be -- that if they ever acquire that kind of capability that they will, in fact, use it because there's nothing to deter them from doing that. They are absolutely committed to jihad, to killing infidels. We're at the top of the list. They're perfectly prepared to sacrifice their lives in doing so. And the old strategies that worked with the Soviet Union during the Cold War don't have much relevance when you're talking about al Qaeda, or a group of terrorists. There's nothing you can put at risk that would deter them from launching an attack against the United States. So we're faced with the necessity to develop a new way to secure the nation.

And 9/11, of course, the President made a series of decisions subsequent to that. We moved very aggressively to enhance our defenses here at home. We created the Department of Homeland Security, the biggest reorganization since the Defense Department was created over 50 years ago. We passed the Patriot Act to give law enforcement the tools they needed to prosecute terrorists. We've enacted Project BioShield to fund specialized research that's needed to develop countermeasures against biological attack -- a whole series of steps that we've taken over the course of the last three years.

But we also had to go beyond that. The President made a decision very early on that mounting a good defense wasn't enough, that when you consider the nature of the threat, the possibility of the terrorists acquiring deadlier weapons than anything we've ever seen before to be used against that even if you're successful 99 percent of the time on defense, that's not enough, because if they get through once, we've got a terrible problem, with a possible loss of thousands or even hundreds of thousands of American lives. And so it's absolutely essential that we also go on offense. That's been a vital part of the Bush strategy in terms of dealing with the threat that we're now faced with.

And he annunciated a new doctrine, a so-called Bush doctrine that we've adhered to ever since, and that was that not only would we go after the terrorists, but we would go after the terrorists, but we would also go after those who sponsor terror, and those who support terror, and those who provided sanctuary and safe harbor for terrorists. {APPLAUSE}

Now, the consequences of that, of course, were first visible in Afghanistan. When we went into Afghanistan, we took down the Taliban regime that was there. We've captured or killed hundreds of al Qaeda. We closed the training camps that the terrorists have used in training to attack the United States. That's also where they trained some 20,000 terrorists by one estimate in the late '90s, who have subsequently then gone out and gone back, oftentimes, to their home countries and established cells various places around the world.

And having done that, obviously, we then -- are now embarked upon a course of action in Afghanistan, standing up a new government. We've got Hamid Karzai there as interim President. They will have elections here in a few weeks, before our elections. They have in the last few weeks registered 10 million Afghans to vote for the first time in history. {APPLAUSE} And over 40 percent of those registered voters are women for the first ever in Afghanistan. {APPLAUSE}

In Iraq, obviously, somewhat different set of circumstances. There we had Saddam Hussein who for 12 years had defied the international community, who had started two wars previously, who had previously produced and used weapons of mass destruction -- specifically chemical weapons against the Kurds and against the Iranians, as well as worked on developing -- trying to develop a nuclear weapon, biological weapon; a government that had sponsored and been a state sponsor of terror, was carried for years on the roster by our State Department as one of the leading sponsors of terror in the world; had a historic relationship with the Abu Nidal organization, which had been headquartered in Baghdad for some time, had previously supported Palestinian Islamic Jihad, who was paying $25,000 to the family of suicide bombers who would go in and kill Israelis; and who had a relationship with al Qaeda. And of course, the results of that are that the government of Saddam Hussein is no more, his military is gone, and Saddam Hussein himself, obviously, today is in jail, which is exactly where he belongs. {APPLAUSE}

But in Iraq, we're also working now to stand up a new government. And it's a very important piece to finishing the task. You can't just simply go in and take down the old regime and then walk away because what you'll have is failed state. You'll have an area that will go the way that Afghanistan did, or that Iraq had in the past. We got to complete the task. And completing the task means going and standing up a democratically elected, representative government in Iraq -- one that will be broadly representative to the Iraqi people and will not again become a threat to its neighbors or to the United States, never again be a safe haven, if you will, for terrorists, or a state that aggressively pursues and uses weapons of mass destruction, as Saddam Hussein had.

Now, it's not an easy task. But we are, in fact, making significant progress. A lot of people said, well, it will never work, or the other question we get is, well, why haven't you finished the job? Of course, we've been at it for 17 months. And I like to remind people of how long it took us from the time we declared our independence in 1776 until we finally had a Constitution in place and elected George Washington President and got started with the government that we all know and revere and the Constitution that we live under now was 13 years. So this is a tough, difficult thing we're trying to do. But it's absolutely the right thing to do, and we've got Prime Minister Allawi now in power. We were told that you'll never be able to transfer sovereign authority to the Iraqis, well, we did it before June 30th. They said, we could never stand up an interim government that would have any kind of legitimacy. Well, we've done it. Mr. Allawi is the Prime Minister. All of the ministries in Iraq now are manned by Iraqis. And we're actively and aggressively training security forces so that they'll eventually be able to take over their own responsibilities for securing their country and dealing with the bad actors who still remain from the old regime, as well as the other types of terrorists that are operating out of Iraq.

The bottom line is that next week, Mr. Allawi will come to the United States and address a General Assembly session of the United Nations as the new interim head of the government of Iraq. They've got a national assembly that has now met once. They've got elections scheduled for next January. That group will, in turn, write a constitution. And by a year from December, they should have in place a democratically elected government in Iraq for the first time. {APPLAUSE}

Now, these are difficult tasks that are hard to do. And I don't want to underestimate how difficult it is, or mislead anybody into thinking that we can sort of wave a wand over it and everything is going to be fine. We will continue to be engaged both in Afghanistan and Iraq for the foreseeable future until they're on their feet and they're capable of providing for their own security. But it's essential, having gone this far, that we, in fact, complete the task at hand. And our strategy has to be in terms of conducting this global war on terror and ultimately prevailing, has to be that we fundamentally change circumstances on the ground in a place like Afghanistan and Iraq so that we, in effect, drain the swamp so to speak, so that we don't have, or leave behind breeding grounds for dictatorial regimes like Saddam Hussein's, or the Taliban, or states that become safe havens and sanctuaries for terror. And we can kill terrorists all day long, but we need to change the circumstances on the ground out there, and that's what we're about now in both those two nations.

Now, the decision that we're going to make on November 2nd is whether or not we're going to continue to pursue this strategy that the President has laid out, and that we've pursued now for the last three years since 9/11; or whether we're going to change course. And I think there's no doubt in my mind about what the right course of action is. I think George Bush is the real commodity here, and is exactly what we need for the next four years. {APPLAUSE}

Now, the problem I have trying to assess what the alternative is, is it's hard from day to day to tell exactly what John Kerry thinks about the war on terror and how we should go forward in dealing with Iraq. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

If you think back about the various positions he's taken -- the count this week I think was eight -- {LAUGHTER} But you can clearly go back, you can hear him saying the same things in the late '90s when Bill Clinton was in the White House, you hear him raising the flag of concern about Saddam Hussein and, so forth, and his failure to comply with U.N. resolutions. When we asked authority to use force to remove Saddam Hussein, he supported the effort, voted for it in the Senate.

Then he got involved in the Democratic primaries this year and announced that he was an anti-war candidate. And then we came around to the vote on the $87 billion that we asked for to support the troops once they were committed, and he voted against that. Subsequently, he was asked just a few weeks ago if knowing all that he knows now, would he have voted the way he did when he supported the go-to-war resolution earlier, and he said, yes, he would. He's since then said, wrong war, wrong place, wrong time. And yesterday, or the day before -- I guess, the day before, he was on Don Imus -- if you get Imus out here in Portland. But I watch him every once in a while. But the intriguing thing was after a fairly lengthy interview by Mr. Imus, and when he was asked specifically a series of questions about what his policy was on Iraq, it was absolutely incoherent. {LAUGHTER} You could not tell where he stood on that basic fundamental issue.

And the problem that I have with that -- and admittedly, I've got strong feelings since I've been there and watched the President make, I think, some of the most difficult decisions that anybody ever has to make in the Oval Office -- this is the fourth President I've worked for, and I've watched two others up close from the perspective of Congress, and I have -- I think -- some sense of what is required, especially when we think about the most difficult decisions that we ask the President to make, and that's in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief, and dealing with life-or-death propositions, not only for the nation, but especially for our men and women in uniform who he has to send in harm's way to deal with some of these most extraordinary threats that we're faced with from time to time. Not every President has to make those decisions. But many of them do sooner or later, and certainly, George Bush has had his share of those tough decisions to make.

Now, what is -- I think -- essential in a President, in that capacity is somebody who has clear vision, who can identify an objective, analyze a problem, listen to advice from various quarters and then make a decision. But he has to make a decision, and then he has to execute on it. He has to stick with it. He's got to stick with it through thick or thin. He'll be criticized from time to time. The polls may go south on him. He'll get hammered by the political opposition and by the editorial writes and the cartoonists. That's life. That's why we pay him the big bucks and he lives in the White House. {APPLAUSE}

But, frankly, what worries me about John Kerry when I look at his track record over the years, not only most recently with respect to these issue centering on Iraq, but also 20 years of voting in the United States Senate, I don't see that kind of fundamental, core capability to make decisions and then execute on them. I see a guy who seems to blowing with the wind, if you will, from time to time; that the pressures that come to bear lead him, for one reason or another, to shift position frequently on probably what is the most fundamental issue of the day. He's taken more positions on this issue than I can recall any major candidate in all the elections I've participated in and watched over the years doing. Maybe two positions, or three positions, but it's -- as I said, the other day, the count was at least eight. I think that the quality that we want in a Commander-in-Chief, in terms of his capacity to make those basic, fundamental decisions for the country, to recognize what is at stake, but also then to be able to carry out those policies is absolutely essential. And I see a lot of that capability in George Bush. And, frankly, I don't see much of that in John Kerry. {APPLAUSE}

He said when he spoke to the National Guard earlier this week that he'll level with the American people on the good days and the bad days. And I look at his performance, and sort of my conclusion is that when the headlines are good, he's with us; and when his poll ratings decline, he's against the policies we've been pursuing. And it's sort of the on-again, off-again proposition I find deeply disturbing in a man who wants to be Commander-in-Chief.

Now, let me emphasize I have never been critical and will not be critical today and never will be critical of his military service. I think his service in Vietnam was, as it was for anybody who had to go and serve, any of our veterans, they've rendered honorable service to the nation and deserve to be thanked for their service. {APPLAUSE} And John Kerry is in that group.

What I do question is his judgment. And I think there's a 20-year record there to look at in the United States Senate where he opposed most of the things that Ronald Reagan did during the 1980s that were vital to rebuilding our military and making it possible for us to prevail in the Cold War. He voted against Desert Storm when I was Secretary of Defense, back in 1991 and the issue was whether or not we go into Kuwait and eject Saddam Hussein and his forces from Kuwait. John Kerry opposed that.

The list of positions he's taken on those issues over the day -- over the years does not lead one to have confidence that, in fact, he would make the right decisions were he in the number one position as President of the United States.

When we -- the decision on November 2nd that we make with respect to how we're going to proceed down the road and what kind of nation we're going to pass on to our kids, and our ability to maintain the safety and security of our country, especially for our children and grandchildren may be the most important kind of voters ever get to make. And I think that's what is at stake on November 2nd. We have to decide which course we want to follow in the future.

Now, let me -- {APPLAUSE} Let me just finally close by saying that there's on group in particular that has been absolutely essential through this whole effort, and that we could not have done what we've done, I don't think we could have been successful in all that we've been able to accomplish, especially for example, in fending off any further attacks here at home, because we know they're still out there and they're still trying to launch some kind of an attack against us, but also they've done a remarkable job for us all over the globe over the course of the last three years, and that's the men and women of the United States military -- {APPLAUSE}

What I'd like to do know is throw it open to questions. We've got proctors in the audience. They're the folks with the attractive orange jerseys on. {LAUGHTER} And they've got -- they've got microphones with them. And if you've got a question or a comment, just flag down one of the proctors, and I'll try to bounce around and call on as many of you as possible in my time available. So we got anybody over here, number six? 

{/speech}
