{title} Vice President and Mrs. Cheney Q & A in Cedar Rapids, Iowa {/title}
{event} Vice President and Mrs. Cheney's Remarks and Q&A in Iowa, Crown Plaza Hotel, Cedar Rapids, Iowa {/event}
{speaker} Dick Cheney {/speaker}
{date} October 23, 2004 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Thank you very much. Well, thank you all very much. And, Lynne, that was a pretty good introduction. Not bad. {LAUGHTER} Not bad. She's getting better. {LAUGHTER}

And she has known me since I was 14. She wouldn't go out with me until I was 17, though. {LAUGHTER} Still a sore point.

I tell people we got married because Dwight Eisenhower got elected President of the United States. In those years, I was a youngster living in Lincoln, Nebraska, with my folks. Dad worked for the Soil Conversation Service. And Eisenhower got elected, reorganized the government, Dad got transferred to Casper, Wyoming, and that's where I met Lynne. And we grew up together, went to high school together, and recently celebrated our 40th wedding anniversary. {APPLAUSE}

I explained that to a group the other night that if it hadn't been for Eisenhower's great election victory in 1952, Lynne would have married somebody else. And she said, right, and now he'd be Vice President of the United States. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

Well, we're delighted to be here today back in Iowa, and especially to get to spend a little bit of time with our great friends, Deba and Jim Leach, Congressman Jim Leach. {APPLAUSE}

They do a superb job for all of us, and Jim and I have known each other, we figured out, for about 35 years now. And he's been a superb member of Congress and does a great job for everybody here in Iowa. And, Jim, it's good to spend time with you. {APPLAUSE}

Of course, this is campaign time, and we're coming down into the home stretch, if you will. We've got, what, 10 or 11 days left, but who's counting? {LAUGHTER} And we're traveling all across the country as we make the final push in this year's presidential campaign, and it is an extraordinarily important election. And what I wanted to do today, what we usually do in these town hall meetings, is I'll make some remarks. I've got a subject I'd like to raise and to address and talk about it a bit, and then we'll have an opportunity to open it up and let those of you in the audience ask questions or make comments, and I'll try not to use all the time up with a long-winded speech. And if you'll do something for me, and that is think of some questions to ask Lynne, because she's pretty good at answering questions, too, so -- {LAUGHTER}

But what I'd like to do is talk about specific -- one specific area today, and I don't mean to suggest that this is the only area of importance in this campaign.

{COMMENT="Technical difficulties"} 

As Lynne suggested, there are a lot of issues at stake in this year's campaign. We're talking about the economy and jobs and education and health care, a wide range of issues that are being addressed and where there are some fundamental differences between the candidates.

But the one area I wanted to focus on in particular was the national security area, because I think it is extraordinarily important, because I think we're going through one of those periods in our history when we're putting in place a new strategy, if you will, that's going to be crucial to safeguarding the nation and protecting our country in the years ahead.

And we come to these moments in our history periodically. We came to one of them after World War II, after we'd won tremendous victories in Europe and the Pacific. War was over, but within a few years, we were faced with the prospects of a Cold War, of a Soviet Union that was nuclear-armed, that had occupied half of Europe, and suddenly was a threat to the fundamental existence of the United States. And we had to develop new strategies, a policy of deterrence. We created new institutions, the Department of Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, new alliances, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, reconfigured our own forces and so forth, and put in place a strategy that was then supported by Republican and Democratic administrations alike for the next 40 years and was ultimately successful, allowed us to safeguard the United States and protect against an attack until ultimately the Soviet Union collapsed and then the Cold War ended on terms favorable to us.

I think we're at another one of those major turning points, if you will, when we have to sit down and think new thoughts about the nature of the threat we face, about what kind of policies we want to put in place to guarantee that we can secure the nation against that threat. And of all of this, of course, stems from the developments that led up to and subsequently have developed from the events of 9/11, when we recognized, I think everybody recognized after 9/11 that, in fact, we were faced with a very serious threat, the threat that on 9/11 led to the worst attack ever on U.S. soil. We lost more lives that day than we lost at Pearl Harbor.

And the events that occurred there forced us to think anew about the kind of threat we're faced with today, the possibility of a handful of terrorists coming into the United States as they did for the 9/11 attack, armed with knives and boarding passes, able ultimately to kill nearly 3,000 of our fellow citizens in New York, Washington and, of course, in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, where Flight United 93 went in.

The big threat we face now, today, is the possibility of terrorists coming into the United States equipped with deadlier weapons than have ever before been used against us, terrorists who are able to get their hands on chemical weapons or a biological agent of some kind, or even a nuclear weapon. That's the worst possible scenario we can contemplate at this point, and that's sort of the ultimate threat that we have to face up to when we think about the threat in the years ahead.

Given that, it's been necessary for us to develop a new strategy in terms of how we're going to deal with it. And of course, after 9/11, we did a number of things. We moved very aggressively to make the defenses here at home much tougher than they had ever been before; created the Department of Homeland Security, the biggest reorganization of the federal government since we set up the Department of Defense in 1947. We passed the Patriot Act that gave law enforcement tools that were already available for prosecuting drug traffickers and organized crime, now made them available for prosecuting terrorists. We passed something called Project BioShield, that's specifically designed to give the government the authority and the ability to develop defenses against an attack with biological weapons. A series of steps that we've taken to strengthen our defenses, to protect our airline travelers, to improve our border security and so forth.

But the President also made another crucial decision, and that was, given the nature of the threat -- and remember that threat out there, the possibility of terrorists coming into the U.S. with a deadly technology of some kind -- given the nature of that threat, that there's no such thing as a perfect defense, that we can't hunker down behind our oceans and erect some kind of barrier here in the United States and guarantee they can't get at us. We can be successful 999 times out of 1,000, but that's not good enough, because if they get through just once with deadly weapons of the kind that we know they'd like to acquire, that would be a terrible blow to the U.S., and obviously could potentially put at risk the lives of hundreds of thousands of Americans in a single day.

So we also made the judgment that we have to go on offense, that a good defense isn't enough, you've also got to have a good offense. And that meant we aggressively go after the terrorists, wherever they plot and train and plan and organize. But importantly as well, we go after those who sponsor and support terror, and that was a new departure, but very, very important piece of business, that we no longer would make a distinction, if you will, between the terrorists and between those who'd sponsor terror or provided a safe harbor or sanctuary for terrorists or financing or training or weapons of any kind.

And that was -- has come to be known as the Bush doctrine, but a very, very important contribution on the part of the President, and I think vital to our overall strategy if we're going to be successful in the years ahead at prevailing in what's come to be known as the global war on terror.

And of course, we've done that now. We did it in Afghanistan when we went in and took down the Taliban, closed the training camps where some 20,000 terrorists trained in the late '90s, including some of those who struck us on 9/11, captured and kill hundreds of al Qaeda, and subsequent to that, then begun to practice the standing up a democratically-elected government to replace the one we took down. And that's the final step in the strategy.

Why do you worry about standing up a democratically-elected government in Afghanistan? Well, you can't go in and take down the old regime and prosecute and capture and kill terrorists and then walk away. You'll leave a failed state in your wake. It will simply become, once again, a breeding ground for terror. And the best antidote we know of to terror is freedom and democracy and a freely elected government, and that's exactly what we're standing up in Afghanistan now. {APPLAUSE}

You can find a lot of folks, one of them that comes to mind is John Edwards, my opponent, who six months after we went into Afghanistan was making public statements about how this is never going to work, it's going to revert to chaos, the Taliban are coming back. Well, that was two-and-a-half years ago when he made those statements. And two weeks ago tomorrow, after registering 10 million voters in Afghanistan, nearly half of them women, two weeks ago tomorrow they held the first free elections in the 5,000-year history of Afghanistan. {APPLAUSE}

Now, it is tough. It is difficult. It is not easy, without question. We were concerned that there would be every effort made to disrupt that process. But in fact, the election was held. It was viewed by international observers. It looks like it went off not without a hitch, but in relatively good shape. And by the end of this year, there will be a new democratically elected government in power in Afghanistan. {APPLAUSE}

Now, Iraq, somewhat different circumstances, but the overall strategy is the same. We went in primarily because Saddam Hussein was a man who had started two wars, who had previously produced and used weapons of mass destruction, who had for years been on the State Department sponsor of terror list, who had provided sanctuary for Abu Nidal, for Palestinian Islamic Jihad; was making $25,000 payments to the families of suicide bombers who would kill Israelis and who had a relationship with al Qaeda. And with that background and that history, and with our concern again being the ultimate threat of terrorists armed with deadlier technologies than they'd ever had before, our concern was that Iraq represented that place where the nexus between terror and weapons of mass destruction was most likely to occur. So we went in and we took down the regime. We put Saddam Hussein in jail, where he is today. It's exactly where he begins -- where he belongs. {APPLAUSE}

Now, in the business of standing up a new government in Iraq. We've got an interim government appointed. They've only been in business a few months, but Iraqis now run all the government ministries. They've got a Prime Minister, Prime Minister Allawi, who is a good man. They have assembled a national convention. They will hold elections in January. They'll write a constitution. By the end of next year, there should be a democratically elected government in place in Iraq. {APPLAUSE}

Now, again, very, very difficult thing to do. It requires us to continue to stay there as long as necessary until they can on the first -- the first requirement is to take responsibility for governing their own country, and secondly, take care of their own security requirements. And both in Iraq and Afghanistan, we're spending a lot of time and effort training and equipping, and standing up security forces so they'll be able to take over the responsibility from our guys, and we'll be able to bring our troops home once they've established the capacity to guarantee their own safety and security with respect to the sovereign territory of both Afghanistan and Iraq.

Now, these are difficult tasks. I don't want to underestimate for anybody how tough it is, in part because we know that the old elements of the former regime, or people like Mr. Zarqawi, who seems to be the lead terrorist in Iraq today, a man who has been associated with al Qaeda in the past, ran one of the training camps in Afghanistan prior to 9/11, then fled to Iraq after we took Afghanistan, and just recently pledged his loyalty to Osama bin Laden, he will do everything he can to disrupt that progress toward an election because they know once we've got a democratically elected government in place that can, in fact, exercise sovereign authority over the territory of Iraq, they're through. He's said as much in messages we've intercepted between him and the al Qaeda organization. So we've got to complete the mission, and we will get it done. There's no doubt in my mind but what we can accomplish it. They -- you find a lot of people who say, well, it can't be done. It's hard. It's costly. Yes, but it's not nearly as costly as ignoring this problem and letting it fester for some additional period of time. {APPLAUSE}

Now, the President, I think, has been a superb leader through this period, partly because he's made tough decisions -- some of the toughest decisions that can come to the man in the Oval Office. And he's established a good strategy. He's done, I think, a superb job. And the other group of people that we need to thank for their fantastic efforts on behalf of all of us are the men and women of the United States military. {APPLAUSE}

Now, the alternative of doing nothing, or of trying to revert back to what I call the pre 9/11 mind set, again, where we sort of hunker down here behind our oceans and hope we don't get hit again, and we don't actively engage overseas, and we don't aggressively go after the terrorists and after those who sponsor terror, that alternative I don't think works. Somehow there's this notion that some people will peddle out there that you've got a choice between what we're doing today, and a reversion to a more normal time.

John Kerry talked about this the other day in an interview in The New York Times. He talked about getting terrorism back to the point where it was only a nuisance. {LAUGHTER} And then he compared it with illegal gambling and prostitution. Now, the implication being you can sort of manage it at some acceptable level here.

But I thought about it when he said that, and when was terrorism ever sort of at an acceptable level, or only a nuisance? And you ask yourself that question, and you go back and you look prior to 9/11, four years ago this month when we -- the USS Cole was stuck off -- off Yemen, and we lost 17 sailors and nearly lost the ship, was it a nuisance then? Or maybe six years ago when they simultaneously hit two of our embassies in East Africa, killed hundreds of people including a number of Americans? Or maybe back 11 years ago, when they first struck the World Trade Center in New York, tried to bring it down that time but failed, injured about a thousand people, killed six or seven? Or maybe it was 1988, December, when they took Pan Am 103 out of the skies over Lockerbie, Scotland with a bomb? Or maybe 1983, 21 years ago, when a suicide bomber drove a truck into the ground floor of a barracks in Beirut and killed 241 Marines? Think about that and say, well, when was terrorism ever a nuisance? Any of those levels represent an acceptable, manageable level of terror that we're willing to accept? And the answer is obviously not. We're not in business to get terror down to some acceptable level. We're in business to defeat it, and we will with George Bush. {APPLAUSE}

So I think the key for us going forward is to stay the course that we're on with respect to the strategy we've got. There's no doubt in my mind but what we can prevail in this conflict, and defeat this challenge just like we have every other challenge we've faced as a nation in the last 200 and some years -- no reason in the world we can't do it. But we got to make the right decision in terms of who we want to have as our Commander-in-Chief for the next four years. And that's the decision we're going to make on November 2nd.

Now, when I look at John Kerry, I'm not challenging his patriotism -- never have challenged his patriotism. I challenge his judgment because I can go back and I can look at a record that stretches back to the 1970s in terms of what he has said about the major issues of the day involving national security, or how he voted for 20 years in the United States Senate. There's a record there for anybody who wants to, to look at it. And you can't fuzz that record up with a little tough talk in a couple of 90-minute presidential debates.

And the record is that when he ran for Congress the first time, he did so on a platform that we should only commit U.S. forces under the authorization of the United Nations.

{AUDIENCE} No! {/AUDIENCE} 

Or in 1984, when he ran for the Senate the first time on the basis of cutting or eliminating most of the major weapons systems that Ronald Reagan used to keep the peace and win the Cold War. Or in 1993, after the first World Trade Center bombing when his response to that was to offer an amendment to cut several billion dollars out of the intelligence budget, an amendment that was so far out that even Ted Kennedy wouldn't vote for it. {LAUGHTER} Or in 1991, when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait and occupied Kuwait and stood poised to dominate the Persian Gulf, and the issue before the Congress was whether or not we'd commit U.S. forces. This time the U.N. had already authorized it. They voted to approve it, commit U.S. forces for Operation Desert Storm to liberate Kuwait and kick the Iraqis out. And John Kerry voted no. Or we can come forward, obviously, to current controversy surrounding operations in Iraq and the vote that he cast, first of all, to commit the forces, and then against the resources that were needed for the troops once they got into combat, et cetera. You all know the story. The bottom line is I don't have any confidence in John Kerry to be the kind of tough, aggressive Commander-in-Chief that will aggressively pursue our adversaries overseas. And I think that's a major failing because I don't think we can win the war on terror unless we aggressively go after our enemies. I think that's vital. {APPLAUSE}

So when we think about that on November 2nd, I think it's important for us to keep that in mind in terms of the choice we're making and the consequences that it has for the nation. And as I say, while the cost is high today, borne especially by our military and their families -- they're the ones that are doing the heavy lifting -- the cost will only increase over time if we postpone the day of reckoning, if we allow them to operate as they did in the past without an aggressive U.S. response -- because there was no aggressive response in the '90s after the World Trade Center bombing in '93, or Khobar Towers in '96, or the East Africa embassy bombings in '98, or the USS Cole in 2000, ask yourself what was the U.S. response. And there wasn't much. One time we launched a few cruise missiles at some empty training camps in Afghanistan. That was it.

The terrorists came to believe that they could strike us with impunity, and they also believed they could change our policy if they hit us hard enough. If we go back to that approach, to that pre-9/11 mind set, all that will happen is they will grow bolder. They'll grow stronger. The odds will go up that sooner or later they'll get their hands on those deadly technologies that they'd love to be able to use against us. And the ultimate cost of defeating that kind of threat will increase. It will be higher than it is today -- very important for us to pursue the strategy we're on, to complete the mission. That's the best way to honor the sacrifice of those who have given it all on our behalf. And we'll do that with George Bush as Commander-in-Chief the next four years. {APPLAUSE}

Now, I've rambled on long enough. What we'd like to do is go to questions. We've got some folks out here in the audience in these attractive red jerseys with the numbers on them that kind of glow in the dark. {LAUGHTER} And they've got microphones. They didn't choose the colors. We did that. That's our fault. {LAUGHTER}

But if you've got a question or comment, just get the attention of one of the folks with the microphone, and then I'll move around and call on the people with the numbered shirts, and you'll get an opportunity to speak and say your peace, or offer up advice, counsel, or ask a question. Got a number of hands in the air. Here, number three, why don't you come on down and let's get somebody right here in the front row. 

{/speech}
