{title} Remarks by the Vice President at the Hudson Institute's James H. Doolittle Award Luncheon Honoring Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld {/title}
{event} Hudson Institute's James H. Doolittle Award Luncheon, The Renaissance Mayflower Hotel, Washington, D.C. {/event}
{speaker} Dick Cheney {/speaker}
{date} May 13, 2003 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. {APPLAUSE} Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} Thank you. Well, thank you very much. And, Herb, let me thank you for your kind comments.

It's a special privilege to be asked to come back today and to join all of you in the Hudson Institute in awarding the General Doolittle Award to an old friend of mine, the Secretary of Defense, Mr. Rumsfeld. I was invited today, I thought, for a couple of reasons. Partly because I'm a big fan of General Doolittle's. I think he's clearly one of the greatest Americans of the 20th century, been one of my heroes; perhaps because I was the award winner a few years ago; but I suppose most importantly because I know a little something about Secretary Rumsfeld.

And Herb mentioned that he'd plucked me from the Congress in 1969, made me a special assistant, and of course, the rest is history. But it didn't go quite that smoothly. {LAUGHTER} The true story of that first meeting is that I flunked my first interview, that I'd arrived in Washington as a young congressional Fellow, going to spend a year on the Hill working on a PhD dissertation, and then I was to go back to the University of Wisconsin and teach.

But while I was here, I was supposed to negotiate an employment arrangement with any congressman of my choice. Don had spoken to the group of Fellows that I was a part of, and I was impressed, so I made an appointment to go see him, and went by his office a couple of days later for an appointment, an interview in the hopes that I could sign on in his office as part of his staff. I was free help to the office -- didn't cost him a thing.

And the interview lasted about 15 minutes and I found myself back out in the hallway, and it was clear that we hadn't hit it off. {LAUGHTER} He thought I was some kind of airhead academic, and I thought he was rather an arrogant young member of Congress. Probably we were both right. {LAUGHTER} But I went to work for another congressman, a good friend of ours, Bill Steiger.

And a couple of months later, Don got nominated by President Nixon to be director of the Office of Economic Opportunity. He joined the administration. And so I sat down one night, unsolicited and wrote a 12-page memo, suggesting to him how he should handle himself in his confirmation hearings, and giving him some sterling advice on what he ought to do with the department once he got confirmed. I gave the memo to my boss, Bill Steiger, who passed it on to the Congressman.

And I didn't hear anything more about it for several weeks. And then finally the confirmations came, and Don got confirmed and sworn in. I got a phone call asking me to come down to OEO to join a transition team, which I did the next day, and walked into the big conference room, about 50 or 60 people gathered around. And Don came in, spoke to the group, left. And shortly after he'd left, his secretary came in and said, is there somebody here named Mr. Cheney? I held up my hand. And she said, come with me. Took me back into his office there at OEO, behind the conference room. He was in there all by himself, second day on the job. And he said, "You, you're Congressional Relations. Now get out of here." {LAUGHTER}

Now mind you -- {LAUGHTER} -- he didn't say, "Sit down -- {LAUGHTER} -- have a cup of coffee. Would you like to come to work for me?" He said, "You, you're Congressional Relations. Now get out of here." And that's how I was hired, literally. And I went out and asked where Congressional Relations was, and was told, and went down the hallway and went to work.

But that was, of course, just before he developed his suave, smooth, warm, fuzzy -- {LAUGHTER} -- personality that we've all grown to love over the years. {LAUGHTER} Henry Kissinger over here is laughing because he knows that that's an exactly true story. {LAUGHTER} He's seen all those traits in our friend.

But it was a tremendously important event for me. And the fact of the matter is, I like to joke about it. And Don Rumsfeld was probably the toughest boss I ever had. I worked for him two different periods of time, a total of about five years, and it had a huge impact on my life, literally changed my whole career. And much of what I've been able to do since in the years since 1968 when I was first kicked out of his office when I flunked that first interview, but it's directly due to the fact that he was willing to take a chance on me and give me some tremendous opportunities over the years. And I will always be grateful for his willingness to take a chance on an unknown quantity.

Of course, we're here today to recognize and honor his service. And certainly his record as a congressman, Navy pilot, ambassador to NATO, White House Chief of Staff, Secretary of Defense twice, a distinguished career in business is in keeping with those values that are epitomized by the General Doolittle Award.

General Doolittle was himself a true American original, a soldier, scientist, strategist, an apostle of air power, an architect of America's airborne might; won the Medal of Honor, of course, for that remarkable raid on Tokyo in April of 1942; commanded the 12th and later the 8th Air Forces in North Africa and Europe during the war. And the fact that the Hudson Institute has picked him to honor men of Doolittle's stamp I think says a great deal for the fact that Don Rumsfeld has been selected for this award today.

The events of September 11th, of 9/11 two years ago, obviously, have had a significant impact upon the course of American history -- really been a watershed event. And it has had enormous consequences based upon the key decision the President made, the leadership he's provided, and the call that has been placed upon the United States military and the Department of Defense in Afghanistan and Iraq and in the global war on terror.

And lest any of us think that the struggle is over with, all we have to do is contemplate last night's tragic events in Riyadh, where some 91 people were killed, at least seven of those, Americans. We don't have the full accounting yet.

Clearly, we are locked in the kind of the struggle that will continue for a good many years, that calls upon the very best in the United States military. And I can't think of anybody better qualified to lead the Department of Defense, to respond to and work for the President of the United States, with our Commander-in-Chief, who set some very high standards in terms of what he wants during this period of time, than the man we honor today, the Secretary of Defense. I don't think there's anyone more deserving of this award than my old boss and current colleague, the Honorable Don Rumsfeld. Don, would you join us? {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
