{title} Vice President's Remarks and Q&A at a Bush-Cheney '04 Town Hall Meeting {/title}
{event} Bush-Cheney '04 Town Hall Meeting {/event}
{speaker} Dick Cheney {/speaker}
{date} August 3, 2004 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Well, thank you all for that warm welcome. Sit down, please. My wife, Lynne, and I are delighted to be here today. I brought Lynne with me. Lynne, you want to stand up? {APPLAUSE} And by the way, that's daughter Mary, next to her, who's working within our campaign operation. {APPLAUSE}

You know, I often tell people that Lynne and I got married because Dwight Eisenhower got elected President in 1952. Where is he going with that story? The fact is, in 1952, I was a youngster living in Lincoln, Nebraska, with my folks. Dad worked for the Soil Conservation Service. Eisenhower got elected, he reorganized the Agriculture Department, Dad got transferred to Casper, Wyoming, and that's where I met Lynne. We grew up together and went to high school together and next month we'll celebrate our 40th wedding anniversary. {APPLAUSE} And I explained that to a group the other day, that if it hadn't been for Dwight Eisenhower's victory in 1952, Lynne would have married somebody else. {LAUGHTER} She said, right, and now he'd be Vice President of the United States. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} Of course, we've got Janet Huckabee with us this morning, the wife of the governor. {APPLAUSE} And I want to thank Win Rockefeller, he does a great job for all of us. {APPLAUSE}

Well, I was -- what I'd like to today, if I can, is, I've got some thoughts I'd like to share with you, wanting to begin with, and then we'll open it up to questions, have an opportunity to respond to your comments and concerns, as well, as we go forward here.

Let me begin by pointing out -- some of you may have watched the events up in Boston last week, the other party's convention. I watched a little bit. But the thing to note now, of course, is I have an opponent, I've got a real, live, honest-to-goodness opponent now in the race for Vice President. Somebody said the other day that John Edwards got picked for Vice President because he was sexy, charming, good looking, had great hair -- {LAUGHTER} -- I said, how do you think I got the job? {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

But all kidding aside, this is going to be a very important election. I say that not just because my name is on the ballot, but because of the enormous significance of the choice we're going to make with respect to the future of America; the kind of policies we pursue, both in terms of defending our nation against the threats that we're now under as well as the basic fundamental decisions we make here at home, in terms of the economy, and how we protect and defend those basic rights and values that are so important to all Americans.

What I'd like to do this morning is take a few minutes and talk about, specifically about what has come to be known as the war on terror or the national security challenges that we now face since last September 11th of 2001.

That really was a morning that changed everything. I think it helps sometimes to gain perspective on that, if you reach back to what the world looked like on January 20th of that year, when the President and I were sworn-in on the Capitol steps in Washington. The fact was that on that morning, the planning for the attack of 9/11 was already well underway. The hijackers had already been chosen, the training had gone forward, money had been raised, some of them were already in the United States, the targets had been selected, and they were well down the road toward planning and then, ultimately, executing the attack on 9/11 that killed some 3,000 of our fellow citizens that morning.

Separate and apart from that, of course, in Afghanistan the al Qaeda had found a home base from which they could operate. Osama bin Laden had established bases there, there were hundreds of al Qaeda in the country, the Taliban were in power. The al Qaeda were operating a series of training camps through which had passed some 20,000 terrorists since 1996, when those camps first opened, through the decade -- or by the year 2000, terrorists subsequently dispersed around the world and set up cells in some 60 countries, including right here in the United States.

We had a situation, obviously, in Iraq, where Saddam Hussein was in power -- a man who had started two wars, a man who had previously produced and used weapons of mass destruction against his own people and against the Iranians, a man who had provided safe harbor and sanctuary for terrorists, who had specifically provided a base of operations for Abu Nidal, one of the worst terrorist organizations in the Middle East, and Palestinian Islamic Jihad; was paying $25,000 to the families of suicide bombers; and who, as well, had a relationship with al Qaeda.

We also had at the same time a couple of other concerns, in terms of that part of the world. We had the difficult problem with the proliferation of nuclear weapons technology. At the time, it was known to us through intelligence sources -- but it was not yet public -- that there was an organization headed up by a man named A.Q. Khan. Khan was the father of the Pakistan nuclear program, he had developed nuclear weapons for Pakistan. Once he completed that process, he then diverted that suppliers' network that he put together and began to supply nuclear weapons technology to some of the world's less attractive regimes: North Korea, Iran and Libya. By nuclear weapons technology, I mean specifically the uranium feedstock you needed to build a bomb, the centrifuge technology that allowed you to enrich uranium to weapons grade, the weapons design, itself, for how you would actually build a weapon.

Mr. Khan was in business for himself and, as I say, spreading the world's deadliest technology to some of the world's most questionable regimes.

Finally, first Moammar Ghadafi in Libya -- Mr. Khan's best customer -- he was spending millions to require that capability, that technology. That was the set of circumstances on January 20th.

There's one other important consideration, too, during that period of time. The terrorists unfortunately had learned a couple of lessons that we wish they had not learned, that they learned two things from the prior history, in terms of their relationship with the United States. The first lesson was that they could strike us with relative impunity, because they had done it repeatedly and there had never been a very effective response from the United States. When I said they did it repeatedly, as I say, you can go back to 1983, when they bombed the Marine barracks in Lebanon, in Beirut, and killed 241 of our people one morning; in 1993, when the first attacked occurred on the World Trade Center in New York; in 1996, when they hit Khobar towers in Saudi Arabia, and killed some 17 or 18 of our airmen that morning; in 1998, when they simultaneously bombed our embassies in Tanzania and Kenya in east Africa; in 2000, when they hit the USSS Cole and killed 17 of our sailors in the port off Yemen.

That was the pattern over time, and the response from the U.S. in nearly every instance was to go out and treat these matters as criminal acts. And the appropriate response, supposedly law enforcement -- you'll run to ground a few times the individual perpetrators of these acts -- Ramzi Yousef, for example, who ran the operation at the World Trade Center in '93 -- arrest him, try him and he's now doing 240 years in a federal pen in Colorado. Good.

The problem was we didn't reach behind Ramzi Yousef to understand that he was part of a larger problem. Once, after the East Africa embassy bombings we fired off a few cruise missiles at training camps in Afghanistan, but didn't hit much, didn't do much damage. So from the perspective of the terrorists, they've learned, they believe, that they could strike us with impunity.

The second lesson they learned was if they hit us hard enough, they could change our policy -- and they had. After the bombing in Beirut in the barracks, in 1983, we withdrew all our forces from Lebanon. In 1993, when we were hit in Mogadishu and lost 18 or 19 of our soldiers in the battle of Mogadishu that fall, in a matter of weeks we had all our forces out of Somalia.

So that combination of events, that sequence of events -- from their perspective -- they could strike the U.S. virtually cost-free, do it, change U.S. policy was the lesson that had been learned by the al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations as they watched our operations prior to January 20th of 2001.

Then, of course, 9/11 happened, and things changed pretty dramatically. Partly because the nation rallied around the President's leadership, because the President took very aggressive action and said that henceforth, anybody -- anybody -- who supported terrorists or provided safe harbor or sanctuary for terrorists would be deemed as guilty of their acts as the terrorists, themselves. {APPLAUSE} That came to be known as the Bush doctrine. What it basically meant was that the United States was going to go on offense; no longer would we wait to be attacked, but we would go on offense and go after the terrorists wherever we found them, wherever they were planning, wherever they were training, getting ready to carry out further operations against the United States; and, as the President indicated, we would also hold accountable those states that sponsored terror. {APPLAUSE}

Of course, the first phase of the operation was what we did in Afghanistan. We moved into Afghanistan a few weeks after 9/11 with our special forces and special ops capabilities, married them up with the local Afghan fighters who were opposed to the Taliban and our sophisticated air assets. In a matter of weeks we had taken down the Taliban, destroyed the regime, killed or captured hundreds of al Qaeda, closed the training camps where those folks who executed 9/11 had been trained, and moved a long way towards destroying Afghanistan as a base of operations for al Qaeda. {APPLAUSE}

In Iraq, of course, we moved into Iraq because of Saddam's past history of support for terror and his past history of having produced and used weapons of mass destruction. And, again, in relatively short order with, I think, one of the more remarkable military campaigns in history, we took down the government. Saddam Hussein is no longer in power, he's in jail. {APPLAUSE} His government is gone, it's been replaced now by an new interim government that I'll talk about in just a minute.

Mr. Ghadafi in Libya watched all of this unfold, saw our operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, and five days after we captured Saddam Hussein, he went public and announced he was going to give up all of his weapons of mass destruction. {APPLAUSE} So all of those materials and plans that he spent millions on for developing nuclear weapons now reside down at Oak Ridge, in Tennessee. The President visited them the other day. We've got it all, he turned it all over to us and decided he no longer would pursue weapons of mass destruction. {APPLAUSE}

Mr. A.Q. Khan, of course, who was the source at the time -- I think the worst source of nuclear proliferation in the world, is now under house arrest in Pakistan. His network has been shut down and he no longer is in business pedaling nuclear weapons technology to anybody. {APPLAUSE}

But equally important, having taken down that network of sponsors of terror and sources of proliferation has been the establishment of interim governments in Afghanistan and Iraq. We can't just simply go in and take down a government and then pull out. We have a vested interest in terms of what's left. We have a strategy that says that we're going to be a lot safer over the long haul if we can establish representative democratically-elected governments in Afghanistan and Iraq. So we're actively involved in that now. {APPLAUSE}

In Afghanistan, we've got Hamid Karzai as the interim President. They have new constitution. They're going to have free elections this fall and have the first democratically-elected government in Afghanistan, I guess, just about ever -- well on their way to establish exactly the kind of government we want to see, the kind of government that will not again become a safe haven for terrorists or a threat to anybody in the region or a threat to the United States.

In Iraq, we've got a good man now who's functioning as the interim Prime Minister, Mr. Allawi. An interesting man. He's Iraqi by birth, had a falling out with Saddam many years ago, went into exile in London. While he was living in London, back in the late '70s, he became a target of assassination. Three individuals, assassins, put on to the mission by Saddam Hussein, broke into his bedroom late one night with an axe, tried to kill him. They did not succeed, obviously -- nearly severed his leg. His wife was there, as well, and she really never recovered from the events of that night and eventually was institutionalized and died not long ago. A terrible tragedy for a family. But this, needless to say, produced one very tough Prime Minister for Iraq, who's doing a great job now. {APPLAUSE}

And, again, they'll hold elections for a constitutional assembly in January in Iraq. So once again we're going to do everything we can to make certain that they get off on the right foot with a representative government, a government that won't be a threat to anybody in the future. But, more than that, a government that will be a model, bound to have an impact on all those countries in the region, in terms of suggesting that there's another way, a better way compared to the difficult circumstances that so many people in that part of the world now live under.

So that's not a bad piece of work when you think about it, over the course of the last three-and-a-half years.

Now, obviously, a lot of the effort that went into all of that was the result of the President's leadership. But first and foremost -- the President would be the first one to say this -- first and foremost -- the debt we owe is to our men and women in uniform. {APPLAUSE}

Just a couple of additional thoughts, and then I'll stop and we can get into questions. It's been very important, as well, for us to take whatever steps are necessary here at home to make it more difficult to strike the United States, that is to make us safer. So we've taken a number of steps in that regard, some just this week. There, you've got to look at such things as the new Department of Homeland Security, the President established and we got passed -- 180,000 employees gathered together now, all focused on one basic fundamental proposition. And that's making America as safe as possible from terrorist attack. {APPLAUSE}

It also includes things like the Patriot Act, which give us the authority -- some of the same authorities that are already being used by law enforcement to prosecute drug traffickers, for instance, apply those same techniques, and use those same techniques in prosecuting terrorists -- {APPLAUSE}

It includes a complete reorientation of the FBI so they're focused less on cleaning up after a terrorist attack, in terms of prosecuting the individuals responsible for it, with a greater focus now on preventing the attack by working effectively -- {APPLAUSE}

It includes Project BioShield, one of the President's ideas, just signed into law within the last couple of weeks that will allow us to equip NIH and other federal health agencies with the capabilities they need, and to develop the sophisticated medical means by which we can counter, for example, an attack with biological weapons. It also includes -- {APPLAUSE} -- includes the announcement made just yesterday by the President in terms of moving forward, some of the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission with respect to strengthening our intelligence capabilities, in terms of our ability to coordinate across agencies at the federal level, the establishment of a National Counterterrorism Center, the establishment of a National Intelligence Director, who will have broad responsibilities for overseeing all of the activities -- the intelligence community, as well, too. So it doesn't mean that we've -- by any means achieved perfection with respect to defending the country from terrorist attack. I don't want to leave anybody with that impression.

Anybody who has thought about it knows there's no such thing as an absolutely perfect defense. We can be successful 99.9 percent of the time, and they only have to get through once in order to hit us. And if they do, with some of the deadly technologies that are now available out there such as biological weapons, or chemical weapons, or even a nuclear weapon, the results for one of our cities could be catastrophic.

So it's very important that not only we do everything we can here at home to toughen the target, but we have to go on offense. We have to go after the terrorists wherever they reside. It's the only way we can guarantee our safety. {APPLAUSE}

Now, this campaign, in part, is going to turn upon the decision the American people make about what kind of strategy they want to pursue going forward. Do they think the President and the rest of us who serve him are on the right track? {APPLAUSE} If that's the case, then I think there's only one choice in this election. {APPLAUSE} All right. {APPLAUSE}

My impression is that sometimes the other team is stuck in the pre-9/11 mentality. They haven't made the transition to what the world is like post-9/11. {APPLAUSE} But having said that, again, I want to thank all of you for being here this morning. I thank you for your willingness to help this enterprise, and I'd be happy to take a few questions. We've got people with microphones out here in the audience, if they would come. Here's a questioner right down front. Why don't you wait for the mike so we can hear? 

{/speech}
