{title} Vice President's Remarks and Q&A at a Town Hall Meeting with Mrs. Cheney {/title}
{event} ----- {/event}
{speaker} Dick Cheney {/speaker}
{date} August 12, 2004 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. {APPLAUSE} Well, thank you very much, Lynne. We're delighted to be here this morning, and have an opportunity to spend some time with all of you in southwestern Missouri. Roy Blunt is a great friend of mine. We work very closely together. He does a superb job, I know, for all of you as your congressman, and a great job as Majority Leader in the House. {APPLAUSE} Might I add that Kit Bond is no slouch either as United States senator. {APPLAUSE}

The fact is that was a very impressive red dress. {LAUGHTER} But I often explain to people that Lynne and I got married because Dwight Eisenhower got elected President of the United States in 1952. It's a stretch to think that presidential elections have those kinds of consequences. But in 1952, I lived with my folks in Lincoln, Nebraska. Dad worked for the Soil Conservation Service. Eisenhower got elected, reorganized the Agriculture Department, and Dad got transferred to Casper, Wyoming -- which is where I met Lynne, and that's the famous red dress. And we grew up together and went to high school together, and we'll mark our 40th wedding anniversary in about two weeks. {APPLAUSE} But I explained to a group the other night if it hadn't been for Dwight Eisenhower's election victory, Lynne would have married somebody else. {LAUGHTER} And she said, right, and now he'd be Vice President of the United States. {LAUGHTER}

But I don't know how many of you watched program out of Boston here a couple weeks ago. They had a political do up there that some of us watched. And it's official now -- I have an opponent. {LAUGHTER} I really do have an opponent. I heard my daughter's smart remark as she introduced me. And people keep telling me, they say, John Edwards got selected to be Vice President because he's sexy, charming, has great hair. And I said, "How do you think I got the job?" {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE}

What we'd like to do this morning -- I've got a few remarks I'd like to share with all of you. And then we'd like to open it up to questions, have a chance to respond to your concerns. Lynne is here with me to respond to questions, as well, too. As I say, this is a somewhat experimental format. We've done several town hall meetings, but this is the first time that we've tried to do one together. So we are experimenting, so we think it might be interesting.

{OTHER-SPEAK} It's a test of our marriage. {/OTHER-SPEAK} {LAUGHTER}

It is a test. {LAUGHTER} But what I'd like to do is just take a minute and talk about the enormous stakes in terms of the decision we're going to make on November 2nd. Because the -- I've been involved in politics, I guess, off and on now for over 30 years. And I can't think of a more important election during my lifetime in terms of the decision we're going to make about where we go as a nation, especially with respect to our national security policy.

We're in a situation now where if you think about it -- and I find it useful to go back and reflect on where we were on January 20th, of 2001, the day the President and I were sworn in, and what the world was like then, and what has transpired since. It helps put in perspective, and I think poses for us some of the issues that we will be deciding when we go to the polls and decide who is going to be President for the next four years -- and even bigger than that, I think who is going to set the course for the nation maybe for the next half century -- very, very important decision we're about to make.

If you reflect back on January 20th, of 2001, when we were sworn in that day, the planning for the attack of 9/11 was already well underway. Most of the terrorists had already been recruited. Many of them had been through the training camps in Afghanistan, where they trained to kill Americans. Some of them were already in the United States. They'd raised the money. They'd been planning that attack since 1996, five years before. It took them that long to get all the pieces put together. But they're very patient. They're absolutely lethal, and once they put their mind on a target like that, they operated according to their timetable, not ours or anybody else's. But all the planning for 9/11 was well underway.

We also had a situation in Afghanistan where the Taliban had taken over, and had turned Afghanistan into a training camp for terrorists, into a safe haven for terrorists -- specifically for the al Qaeda organization. So there were thousands of them there, including Osama bin Laden, the leader. And they had turned out sometime in the late '90s, between 1997 and about 2000, they'd trained -- 20,000 terrorists had gone through those camps, and then spread back out around the world to some 60 different countries, including here in the United States, where they set up terror cells.

In Iraq, Saddam Hussein was in power. He'd started two wars. He had provided safe haven and sanctuary for terrorists for many, many years. He was paying $25,000 to the families of suicide bombers. He provided a home for al Qaeda, and for Abu Nidal. He had generally been -- he'd also obviously developed and used weapons of mass destruction in the past, both against the Iraqis and the Iranians.

And we had a couple of other developments in that part of the world that were not public at the time that were very important. The A.Q. Khan network was in business. Mr. Khan was a Pakistani, a man who had acquired and then developed the technology to develop nuclear weapons. He knew how to acquire the uranium feedstock, to design the centrifuges to enrich the uranium, and he had a weapons design. And he had, in fact, been the father of the Pakistan nuclear program. And once he completed that task, he had diverted this whole network to his own purposes. And he was selling nuclear weapons technology to North Korea, to Iran, and to Libya.

Moammar Ghadafi in Libya was spending millions of dollars to acquire this capability and was well on his way. Once that whole process had been completed, he would have been in possession then of nuclear weapons. He wasn't there yet, but he was working on it.

We also had a situation in the fact that the terrorists had learned two unfortunate lessons, if you will, at our expense in the prior period of time before we were sworn in. They'd learned, first of all, that they could strike at the United States with relative impunity -- because they had, repeatedly. And the best response we usually came up with was to treat each attack as some kind of criminal enterprise. We'd go after the individuals who'd launched the attack. Sometimes we'd catch them, put them in prison. But we never really reached behind the individuals to look at the networks that had undertaken these attacks.

Of course, we'd been hit in Beirut, Lebanon in 1983, when we lost 241 Marines, when they blew up the barracks; 1993, first attack on the World Trade Center; 1996, Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia; 1998, the East Africa Embassy bombings in Tanzania and Kenya; 2000, the USS Cole -- a whole sequence of attacks, most of which had gone unanswered, or the answer had been a law enforcement response. Once we fired off a few cruise missiles at a training camp in Afghanistan. But from the standpoint of the terrorists, they could strike us, and there was no real penalty to be paid.

And the second lesson they'd learned was that if they hit us hard enough, they could change or policy -- because they had. After we got hit in Lebanon in 1983, in relatively short order we pulled out of Lebanon completely. In 1993, in Mogadishu -- there, they killed 19 of our soldiers, and within a matter of weeks, we'd withdrawn all of our forces from Somalia. And so those two lessons -- if you hit the U.S., and you won't be struck in return; and if you hit the U.S., and you can change U.S. policy if you do it -- and that was sort of the set of circumstances that were out there when we were sworn in.

And then the attack of 9/11 came, and, of course, it changed everything. I think everybody came to realize at that moment that we were, in fact, at war -- that we'd been at war for some time. Our enemies knew it; we didn't. We hadn't really as a nation come to grips with that basic fundamental proposition.

But 9/11 changed everything in the sense that it forced us to think anew about our enemies, about who our enemies were, about the kind of threat we faced as a nation, about what kind of strategy we needed to pursue to be able to safeguard our nation from those attacks. The President made a very basic, fundamental decision that very first night after the attacks. And that was that henceforth, we would hold accountable those -- not only the terrorists, but also those who supported terror. If a state or a government provided safe harbor or sanctuary, or financing, or training or weapons to a terrorist organization, they would be deemed just as guilty of the terrorist act as the terrorists themselves.

And the first place we put that principle to test was in Afghanistan. We went into Afghanistan, and in a matter of weeks, we took down the Taliban government, captured or killed hundreds of al Qaeda, put Osama bin Laden on the run. We haven't captured him yet, but we haven't given up. And we will get him eventually, I'm convinced. We closed all the training camps where they've trained, as I say, some 20,000 terrorists to kill Americans and others.

And subsequent to that, we, of course, now -- they've stood up an interim government. They have a President in place. They've got a constitution. They'll hold free elections later this fall. Schools are open. And the economy is beginning to thrive. Young girls can go to school now -- something they weren't able to do before -- a pretty significant transition, a lot of work to be done yet.

In Iraq, we went into Iraq obviously very aggressively, took down the government. Saddam Hussein today is in jail, exactly where he belongs. {APPLAUSE} But his sons are dead. His government is out of business. He's no longer in a position to be able to threaten anybody. And we've still got an awful lot of work to do in Iraq. I don't want to underestimate the difficulty of the task. Nobody should. We're going to be involved there for some considerable period of time.

But we've got a good man in Prime Minister Allawi, who's taken over. The Iraqis now are running all of the government ministries. We're standing up Iraqi security forces and training and equipping them so that they'll soon be able to move in, take over more and more responsibility to provide for their own security. They also have a constitutional process now set up. They'll hold elections next January. They're on their way, as well, to establishing a self-governing administration, if you will, in Iraq that will never again be a threat to its neighbors or to the United States -- a very, very important piece of business.

As we went through this process, Moammar Ghadafi in Libya watched what happened in Afghanistan and Iraq, and then five days after we captured Saddam Hussein, he went public and announced he was going to give up all of his aspirations to have weapons of mass destruction. And he did. {APPLAUSE} And all of that material today, the weapons designs, the uranium feedstock, the enrichment machinery and so forth is all now under lock and key over at Oak Ridge, in Tennessee, where it ought to be -- safe and never again be put to that use.

Mr. Khan, the man who ran the suppliers' network is under house arrest in Pakistan. His suppliers' network is closed down. The worse source of proliferation of nuclear weapons technology that we've ever seen is now out of business. He's not going to sell anything to anybody. {APPLAUSE}

All of that is what we've been able to accomplish over the last three-and-a-half years. But it's very important for people to understand that this is perhaps the end of the beginning, but we have a very long way to go. This is a threat that we're going to have to deal with probably for our lifetime. It's not like any war we've ever been engaged with before. When you think about World War II, and the length of time we were actually engaged from Pearl Harbor in December of 1941, till Germany surrendered in May of '45, or Japan in September of '45, those were relatively brief conflicts. The worst conflicts in our history, but relatively there was a beginning, there was a middle, and there was an end, and then the war was over with. This is a situation in which it's a very different enemy -- when you think about their motives, what they're trying to do. They're obviously trying to impose their very radical extremist ideology on everybody else. They have no tolerance for democracy. They have no tolerance for other views with respect to people who want to pursue a different religious faith, for example. They are perfectly prepared to kill anybody who stands in their way.

They are also prepared to use weapons of mass destruction if they can ever get their hands on them. And the worst proposition we face today by way of a threat is the possibility of an al Qaeda cell in the middle of one of our own cities with a biological agent, like smallpox, maybe, or a nuclear weapon of some kind that they would be prepared to detonate. And there's nothing to restrain them. There's no reason why they wouldn't use that kind of capability once they get their hands on it.

Our old strategies from the Cold War worked great against the Soviets, but the whole concept of deterrence means nothing when you're talking about an al Qaeda terrorist who is prepared to die for Allah, and whose purpose here is to take as many people with him as he possibly can -- primarily Americans. That's the kind of adversary we're faced with here for the foreseeable future. It doesn't take large numbers of them. Nineteen hijackers, we saw what they could do on 9/11 when they killed 3,000 of our people in a couple of hours on a beautiful September morning without any provocation whatsoever.

Part of the debate that we'll be dealing with this years is over this question of when is it appropriate to use U.S. military force, when are we justified in moving aggressively against a sponsor of terror, or a group of terrorists, or of taking military action, if that's what is called for, in order to defend the United States.

There are those who believe we should never be preemptive, that we should never take that first step. But when you consider the threat, when you consider the consequences of failing to deal with the threat might, in fact, be the destruction of one of our own cities, then I think it begins to put things in perspective -- that it's absolutely essential to do exactly what the President has done, which is to say that United States will not wait for the next attack. We're not going to stand by and let somebody take a shot at us before we respond. We've put them on notice now that if you have aspirations to hit the U.S., you will be struck. {APPLAUSE}

Another element of the debate is that John Kerry spends a lot of time running around saying, well -- well, he's said several different things. {LAUGHTER} But most recently that -- he now decides that the vote that he cast to go to war probably was the right vote after all, but he would have done it differently, that we should have done more to seek allies, to get the approval of the United Nations and so forth. Well, remember what we did do -- we had 30 nations fighting alongside us in Iraq. It's not as though we didn't go with our allies, we did. We also went to the United Nations and said, look, Saddam Hussein has been jerking the U.N. around for 12 years, consistently violating U.N. Security Council resolutions, we need to hold him accountable -- got a unanimous resolution out of the Security Council. But we refused to be blocked when push came to shove and we had to make a decision.

In other words, this President made a basic fundamental decision that he's not going to seek a permission slip from anybody when the question is whether or not you defend the nation. {APPLAUSE} Now, George Bush believes that with every fiber of his being. You do everything you can to organize allies, and we've done that -- and to be actively and aggressively involved, using all the international mechanisms that are out there. But in the final analysis, the President of the United States is the one who has to make those tough calls, who has to make those life-and-death decisions for all the rest of us. That's why he gets paid the big bucks and lives in that fancy house in Washington. {LAUGHTER} Very, very, very important responsibility -- and we don't want to turn that responsibility over to somebody who doesn't have deeply held convictions about right and wrong. {APPLAUSE}

And I must say I look at the record of our opponents, we can talk about that more if anybody is interested, but there's a lot of hesitation and uncertainty. John Kerry is a man who voted against the resolution to use force back in 1991, when the issue was whether or not we'd kick the Iraqis out of Kuwait. He voted no on that. This time around, of course, he voted for committing the troops, and using the force, and then a few months later, when the question was the $87 billion that they needed once they were in the field, in order to buy a lot of the equipment and ammunition, spare parts and so forth, he voted no. And there were only four members of the United States Senate who voted to commit the force and then voted against supporting the force once they were there -- two of those four members were John Kerry and John Edwards. I don't think that's an acceptable pattern of behavior, in my view, for someone who would be President of the United States. I think that it's fundamentally wrong to vote to commit the force and then not give them the resources they need once they're in combat. {APPLAUSE}

Finally, what we need is somebody who's got absolute steady character, who understands the big picture and is willing to make those tough decisions when they have to be made. We need somebody who will support the troops 100 percent, and that's exactly what we've got in George Bush. {APPLAUSE}

So with that, why don't I stop and say we'd be happy to entertain some questions. We got some people in the audience with microphones. And if you raise your hand, they'll come by and give you a mike so we can respond to your concerns or comments, or advice. I can take it right to the top. {LAUGHTER} So we have somebody over here? 

{/speech}
