{title} Remarks by the Vice President to the National Association of Manufacturers {/title}
{event} National Association of Manufacturers, Washington, D.C. {/event}
{speaker} Dick Cheney {/speaker}
{date} February 28, 2001 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you, Jerry, and let me thank all of you for that warm welcome. That's a great way to start the day.

Of course, we're delighted to be here and to have an opportunity to share a few thoughts with you this morning. I thought the events last night were remarkable. I thought the President did a hell of a job. {APPLAUSE}

You know, there's a lot of ritual and tradition that goes with a State of the Union or a Joint Session of Congress, such as we had last night.

At one point, about 8:20 p.m., I had to leave the House side, where we had had dinner with the Cabinet, go over to the Senate side, and round up the Senators and lead the Senators from the Senate side back to the House. That's because many people think the Senate can't find the House side without leadership. {LAUGHTER}

But it was really peculiar, because it's one of those special evenings. You know, you're up there on the podium, Speaker Hastert and I were, in those chairs right behind the President, and you're on television all the time, or you think you're going to be on television all the time, and we were a little worried that the events would be overwhelmed by our charisma. {LAUGHTER} But fortunately, they had a close-up of the President, and you didn't see that much, actually, of Speaker Hastert and myself. {LAUGHTER}

But it was a very special evening for those of us who have worked long and hard to get the Bush administration up and running. {APPLAUSE} What I'd like to do this morning is take a few minutes and talk a little bit about that last night, and I hope try to put some of this in perspective.

We're already hearing from some of our critics that are complaining about the program we put up there, and as often happens, it's very important during the course of these debates to keep them focused on the facts. So we may have a difference of opinion about what the policies ought to be, but there shouldn't be any disagreement about basic, fundamental facts, and I hope to set that straight this morning.

First of all, with respect to the transition, I've been involved in five of them now, this one has gone more smoothly than any of the other five. I think it's because the President came to town and he's done exactly what he said he was going to do -- campaign on the basis of tax policy and education and Social Security and Medicare reform, and rebuilding the military; and came to Washington, and lo and behold, that's exactly what we're working on, in terms of our priorities.

He's put together a great Cabinet. We've got some old-timers, some pros like General Powell at State, Rumsfeld at Defense, Paul O'Neill at Treasury. We've got a lot of new talent, like Rod Paige at Education; Ann Veneman, for example, at Agriculture; Tommy Thompson in from Wisconsin at HHS. So it's a fascinating group. He's also put together a very good White House staff.

As I say, I've watched enough of these over the years to know all about sharp elbows and battles for floor space in the West Wing and how that whole process unfolds, and there hasn't been any of that in this administration. In fact, people like Karl Rove and Karen Hughes, Josh Bolten, Andy Card have moved in and taken hold and really done a superb job.

What we saw last night, of course, was the President laying out his priorities and the basic, fundamental legislative program that we want to pursue over the course of the next few years. There are, I think, sort of key points to keep in mind that I wanted to focus on this morning.

First of all, of course, he does fund certain key priorities, and he laid those out in his speech, in terms of education, and the emphasis on education, and rebuilding our military forces, and the efforts he wants to make in a number of other areas.

If you look at the discretionary budget, it grows by 4 percent. I've heard one of our friends from the other party this morning on television, turned on, made the statement, he said: after the tax cuts, there is no room for anything else in the budget.

Wrong, factually untrue. He must not have listened to the same speech I listened to last night, because, of course, there is 4 percent growth in discretionary spending. The overall increase in federal spending, when you add in the entitlements next year, is $100 billion. Nobody can suggest that increased spending of $100 billion is being too tight, if you will, with respect to federal spending. We are, in fact, spending money on important priorities.

We are moving in some areas to tighten up. We think that's appropriate. We think there are areas where we can reform. We think that needs to be done. But the discretionary spending goes up 4 percent and, as I say, the overall budget up by $100 billion.

Now, the reason I think some of our friends in Congress have a problem with that is because last year discretionary spending went up 8 percent; and since we got into the surplus mode around here over the last couple of years, we've had a total of three years where, frankly, Congress and the last administration, in my view, overdid it with respect to discretionary spending.

And we'd see the President go up with his request, the Congress oftentimes afraid that we would end up with some kind of government shutdown if they didn't approve the President's budget request. Then they would add on their own, or we would end up with so-called urgent supplementals outside the normal budget process.

All told, what it led to was an 8 percent increase in discretionary spending last year. At that rate, the federal budget would double in about eight years. That's unacceptable. So we've slowed the rate of increase, but there is, obviously, money in there for some new priorities.

We also pay down debt. Now, you're going to hear this argument about whether or not we're aggressively enough addressing the problem of paying down debt.

The fact is, over the next 10 years, the President's budget will pay down $2 trillion in debt. That's all the debt that matures over the next 10 years. The only way you can pay down more debt is to pay a premium to have people turn in their bonds earlier, their treasuries earlier than they're due.

I don't know anybody who thinks it would be a good idea for us to use the taxpayers' money to pay a premium to those people who hold federal debt to get them to cash in earlier than the time called for, the regular maturity on those securities. Makes no sense at all. All the debt that comes due over the next 10 years will be retired, some $2 trillion. So the suggestion that we're not paying down debt -- wrong, not true.

If we look at the taxes, of course, the President's tax proposal is in there, $1.6 trillion, exactly the tax cut that we ran on. We went through the process of a campaign, we had a lot of people say, gee, you shouldn't go for $1.6 trillion. You ought to back off your tax cut.

We had a close election, and a lot of the talking heads here in Washington said, boy, you're going to have to back off that tax cut, close election -- obviously, you're going to want to give up the cornerstone of your policy.

And the President said, no, I'm not going to do that. I ran on $1.6 trillion. That's what I think the country needs. That's what I'm going to recommend to ho Congress. I'm not going to back off. And lo and behold, that's exactly what we've sent forward to the Congress.

And it's the right package for the country. It will do exactly what we think needs to be done by collapsing five brackets into four, reducing rates, by repealing the death tax and the marriage penalty, providing for increase in the child credit, et cetera. So we think it's the right way to go, and the President made those arguments last night, I thought, very effectively.

Let me say just a word or two in an area that hasn't really been talked upon very much over the last couple of days, and that's this whole notion of do we need a trigger, do we somehow have a flawed set of assumptions here, is this a high-wire act with respect to the estimates here with respect to the overall size of the budget and whether or not there's room in it for a tax cut. And let me make a few points that I hope you'll keep in mind as you talk to members of Congress and debate this back home, as well.

First of all, our economic growth forecast upon which this is based is very conservative. It's actually below the blue chip forecast in terms of economic growth for the next few years. The blue chip forecast over the next 10 years is about 3.3 percent; we base this on 3.1 percent. That's almost unheard of in this town, to be that conservative in our economic forecast with respect to the future.

Secondly, we assume that revenue grows more slowly than the economy does, another conservative bias, if you will, built into the system with respect to how big the surpluses are likely to be.

Third, the budget and the forecast assumes no increase in productivity in the federal government over the next 10 years. Productivity in the private sector is increasing about 3 percent a year. The federal government ought to be able to get some productivity increase over the next 10 years, but we don't assume any productivity increase in the operations of the federal government in connection with this budget -- another very conservative bias, if you will, built into our estimates.

Fourth, we used a static revenue analysis. That is to say, we don't assume any feedback into the economy as a result of the tax cuts. We know there will be some. We know it will add significantly, possibly stimulate additional revenue. None of that's in there. We used a static analysis in estimating the impact of the revenue.

Fifth point, the baseline from which we calculate the surplus assumes growth in entitlements. You can estimate how big the Medicare population is going to be 10 years down the road. All of that's factored in there. It assumes inflation in terms of the discretionary accounts, so that, in fact, the baseline itself is adjusted upwards over time.

And it also, sixth point, includes all the President's new spending initiatives. That's built into the baseline that we forecast last night before we calculate what the surplus is.

Having done all that, we then set aside about an $800 billion contingency fund, as well, that will be used for what we can anticipate will be there. There will, after the strategic review is done, probably be requirements for some additional defense spending. There's likely to be needs, perhaps, for agriculture, additional Medicare expenses, but we've got funds in the budget set aside for that purpose.

So this notion that somehow this is a fly-by-night or shaky set of assumptions or that we're straining here to come up with an economic justification for the package simply isn't true.

My first State of the Union message that I watched from the floor of the House was 32 years ago, in 1969. I have never seen, in 32 years, as conservative a set of assumptions as we used in putting this budget together. So don't let the opposition or those who are opposed to our tax proposal, for example, suggest that somehow we're playing fast and loose with the numbers here. We aren't. We've been very conservative. There's every reason to expect that the surplus will, in fact, actually be bigger than the current forecast.

Finally, let me touch just on two other points, then I'll stop and be happy to answer a couple of questions.

One of the things that comes with having been around town as long as I have is I have my memory of historic events, and every once in a while, again, I like to, if not set the record straight, at least put my views out there.

One of the things that some of our friends on the other side are saying, are talking about the, "bad old days of the Reagan era." That bugs the heck out of me. {LAUGHTER}

What I remember about when Ronald Reagan came to town was an economy that was absolutely in the tank, the Cold War raging, a defense establishment that was in a terrible state -- we weren't even able to mount a rescue operation to get our people out of the embassy in Iran, where they were being held against their will -- a top income tax rate of 70 percent, an economy that was absolutely on the skids.

As a result of what we did in the early Reagan years, we rebuilt America's defenses, which let us win the Cold War; which let us then take our defense spending as a percentage of GDP, instead of the 6 percent we were spending on the Cold War, down to about 2.5 percent, where it is today, which is one of the main reasons we've got a surplus today, because we won the Cold War, and we won the Cold War because we made those investments in the early '80s.

Of course, that economic prosperity that we've enjoyed over the course of the last 20 years has a lot to do with the fact that we fundamentally reformed the tax code back in the early Reagan years, and we got off the kick of a 70 percent top rate and took it down to 28 percent, and laid the groundwork for the fundamental expansion of economic activity and the creation of capital and creation of wealth and creation of incentives for people to work and save and earn more than ever before in our history.

So when I hear somebody on the other side talk about the "bad old days" of the Reagan era, I like to remind them, the bad old days were what happened before Ronald Reagan came to town, not after.

The second key point that I think needs to be made, too, is that I think President Bush deserves a great deal of credit for being willing to take on two very, very tough -- actually, three -- very tough issues that our predecessors would not touch: Medicare reform, Social Security reform and the development of a comprehensive national energy policy. {APPLAUSE}

I'm not here today to advocate a particular course on any of those, but we've set the process in motion.

One of the key things I thought he did during the campaign was to lay on the table the notion of reforming Social Security; the idea, for example, of individual retirement accounts for the younger generation, so that they can, in fact, own and manage some of their own resources in Social Security and get a higher return than would otherwise be the case; the willingness to take the work that's been done by Senators Breaux and Frist and Congressman Thomas, with respect to Medicare reform; and the need now to move on aggressively with respect to developing a national energy policy, because we haven't had a national energy policy for a long time, and if's there's a storm cloud on the horizon out there with respect to our long-term economic prosperity, a significant part of it is focused on the lack of a coherent national energy policy, so those are areas we're going to work on, as well.

Anyway, I thought it was a good evening. The debate is about to be joined. That's as it should be. There will be strong arguments on both sides. The President made it clear we want to work with those who disagree with us and those in the other party to try to put together a good package for America. 

{/speech}
