{title} Speech to the European Parliament (British Presidency) {/title}
{event} European Parliament, Strasbourg {/event}
{speaker} Gaston Thorn {/speaker}
{date} December 16, 1981 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Madam President, Madam President of the European Council, ladies and gentlemen, Parliament is allowing me four or five minutes to speak—fortunately, I should say, since that means I do not have to make a speech. In any case today is the day when Parliament renews acquaintance with the European Council. The Commission wished it to be so and it is therefore my pleasure to leave the Members of this house all the time they need: we shall no doubt be meeting again on other occasions. {LAUGHTER}

Will you allow me to make three quick remarks. I should like first of all to thank on behalf of the Commission and in your presence, Madam President, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom for the work and the efforts which she and her distinguished colleagues have given throughout the term of her presidency: I speak from experience when I tell you that it is not always easy. I would like to add that by coming to this house today the President of the Council is giving shining proof of the coherence and institutional logic which is a result of your own election by universal suffrage and which completes the circle of proper and democratic operation of this Community: that, ladies and gentlemen, is important for you and for the Community as a whole. For it was inconceivable that a European Council which had willed the election of our Assembly by direct universal suffrage should then ignore it and not appear before you: it was illogical and it was a political mistake; today, Madam, that mistake has been put right. It was a condition which had to be met before there could be institutional peace within our Community. {APPLAUSE}

Ladies and gentlemen, it is quite clear that the political situation which has developed over the last few days casts a bleak and very special light over the problems which we face within our Community. The year is ending in an atmosphere of doubt and tension. I do not propose to raise unnecessary alarm, but I wish nevertheless to set things before you as I see them—not just I but no doubt many of you and without doubt millions of our fellow citizens.

Where have we reached? We are at the nadir of the greatest economic crisis since the war and we are in the midst of the greatest political crisis we have seen for years. We cannot ignore what is going on in other corners of the European peninsula. Even if the first right of every people is to resolve its own problems we cannot remain indifferent to what is going on elsewhere in our continent. Wherever people with a desire for peace and for progress are in difficulty the Community as a community feels concerned. Wherever the development of democratic ideas is needed the Community feels it is involved. Wherever the threat of isolation from the world hangs the Community has the duty to react today more than ever. {APPLAUSE}

You will agree then, ladies and gentlemen, that under the circumstances we must put the question of our own internal problems, but they general or specific, into perspective. That does not mean that we must minimize them, even less that we should skate around them. What it means quite simply is that we must approach them mindful of the seriousness of what is going on outside and of what is at stake in the present situation. I must say that during those very meetings in London at the end of November and earlier this week the political heads of our Member States were very much aware of our increased need for cohesion. They understood perfectly the seriousness of the situation and the need to continue progress—at whatever price—along the road towards new stimulus for the Community. We the Commission are of course disappointed that agreement could not be reached all around, but we agree with the President of the European Council that every government represented at the Council realized the limitations of its own individual and even, I think, national capacity, and realized that more than ever the need was for solidarity and for Community policy. And if it was at that point that the President of the Commission was asked to try and find a solution to the remaining problems—problems whose magnitude I will not attempt to conceal—it is no less than recognition of the role which the Commission plays in our Community. It is within the limits of the mandate which has been conferred upon us. It is also within the limits of what this Parliament has asked us to do and we are going to do everything we can, Madam President, to reach a real solution by 15 January.

Following that, I should say that Parliament should also remember that building Europe has never really been the task of a few officials, no matter how devoted they may be. Making economic, social and political progress nowadays has become everybody's job. It is your job too, ladies and gentlemen. It is up to you to make your electors aware of what is at stake with the Community's internal situation and what is going on internationally, and what it will cost. I think the time has come to put our priorities right. We know we have a milk problem to resolve and we have a budget problem to resolve. We are not going to minimize them; we are going to try to resolve them. But we must realize first and foremost as Europe enters its second generation that Europe is still seeking itself, that Europe is concerned, but that the need for Europe is greater than ever. So, let us look to our priorities. Let us define Europe. Let us find Europe. Let us find it together and give ourselves a policy to work with, whether it is a budget policy or even better, an institutional policy. That is the dialogue which I hope all three of us together are now in a position to start. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
