{title} President Discusses Strengthening Social Security in Montana {/title}
{event} Montana ExpoPark, Great Falls, Montana {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} February 3, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you all for coming. {APPLAUSE} Thank you all for being here. Go ahead and have a seat. Thank you. Nice to be in the part of the world where the cowboy hats outnumber the ties. {APPLAUSE} Thanks for coming. Gosh, it's wonderful to be back in Montana. What a fabulous state, full of really decent, honorable people.

Conrad, thanks for introducing me. I'm glad you didn't auction me off. {LAUGHTER} Doing a fine job in the United States Senate, and I'm proud to call you friend. Thank you very much, sir. {APPLAUSE}

And I want to thank Max Baucus for being here. We have worked a lot together in four years. You know, we've confronted a lot of things in this country -- we've confronted a recession, and confronted the need to get this economy growing. And Max worked hard with the administration to cut taxes and open up markets. And I appreciate working with you, Max. It's been a lot of fun. We got more work to do. {APPLAUSE}

We're here to talk about an issue after a while that's going to remind us we got a lot of work to do if we're going to do our duties as public servants. But, Max, thank you. Denny Rehberg, thank you, friend, for coming. I'm honored you're here. Proud of the United States Congressman from the great state of Montana {APPLAUSE} And Jan.

The Governor met me at the airport -- the Governor is here. Governor, thank you for coming. I'm proud you're here. One of these days you're going to join the same club as me and Judy and Marc Racicot -- that's the ex-governors club. {APPLAUSE} But right now, you may have the best job in America, being the governor of a great state. Proud you're here. Lt. Governor is here with us today. We got a lot of other officials -- Secretary of State -- thanks for coming.

You know, we're flying over on Air Force One, and guess all -- guess what Burns and Rehberg -- all they wanted to talk about was cattle. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} Montana beef. {APPLAUSE} And that's an important subject because it's part of how to make sure our economy continues to grow. They kept asking, are you talking to markets overseas to get the Montana beef into those markets? I said, you bet I am. And we'll continue to do so.

One of the reasons I work with Max to -- on free trade is because I believe when we open up markets for products, U.S. products, Montana products, people are going to more likely be able to find a job. We want to be selling stuff you grow here and stuff you produce here all around the world. And so I want to tell -- tell Max and Denny and Conrad, we're going still be opening up markets.

They also had a few other things on their mind. They wanted to talk about energy. Last night, I said to the United States Congress -- I said, we have been debating energy long enough. {APPLAUSE} It is time -- it is time to get a sound energy plan to my desk so we can become less dependent on foreign sources of energy. {APPLAUSE}

People in Montana know something about energy. I know that. They said also make sure you keep in mind the needs of the rural health -- hospitals and docs. You've got some rural -- you've got some rural issues here in Montana because you've got a lot of land. {LAUGHTER} And not a lot of people. {LAUGHTER} That's the way a lot of folks probably want to keep it, too, I suspect. {APPLAUSE}

If you want to have health care available and affordable, we've got to do something about these lawsuits that are running good doctors out of practice. {APPLAUSE} We've got a problem in that these lawsuits are making it costly for docs to stay in business, and are hurting the federal budget, too. When you're afraid of getting sued, you practice defensive medicine. In other words, you prescribe more than you need to just in case you have to go to a court of law. And that runs up the cost of Medicare, Medicaid, veterans benefits.

So I've come to the conclusion that the medical liability issue is a national problem that requires a national solution. And I call upon Congress to pass real, meaningful medical liability reform. {APPLAUSE}

Before we -- before we talk about Social Security, I do want to talk a little bit about the amazing times we're living in. Just think about what has happened in the last four months. There was an election in Afghanistan. Millions -- millions of people voted for -- {APPLAUSE} -- voted for a leader -- voted for a President for the first time in 5,000 years. I don't know who's counting, but that's a lot, you know. {APPLAUSE} I mean, it's an amazing story, when you think about it. It wasn't all that long ago that the Taliban was providing safe haven to al Qaeda in Afghanistan. And that's where they plotted and trained. That's why we went in, to rout them out.

We said if you harbor a terrorist, you're equally as guilty as a terrorist. The doctrine still stands. And the reason the doctrine still stands is because there's an enemy that still hates what we stand for. We will stay on the offense. No matter where they hide, where they run, the United States of America and coalition forces will be after them to keep us safe. {APPLAUSE}

That is our duty. That's the responsibility of the federal government. And I want to thank those who wear our uniform for serving this great country of ours. {APPLAUSE} But the lesson of Afghanistan -- the lesson of Afghanistan should remind us we've got a greater force at our disposal than just our military, and that is our belief in the ability of freedom to change societies.

And we saw it. The high school students and college students here are watching some amazing history unfold. Think about what you've seen. You saw people vote in Afghanistan to elect a President. You saw people vote in the Ukraine to elect a President. You saw people vote in the Palestinian Territories to elect Abu Abbas. And you saw last Sunday some incredibly brave people in Iraq defy the terrorists and cast their ballots by the millions, because of freedom. {APPLAUSE}

Freedom is powerful. Freedom is incredibly powerful. I believe that freedom is embedded in everybody's soul. That's what I believe. I believe that given a chance, people will vote. And people will -- people will adhere to the rules of self-government. It's not easy in parts of the world, though, where there's terrorists and tyrants trying to stop the march of freedom. And the reason they are, and the reason they're trying to stop the march of freedom is because they think the exact opposite. They believe in control of people's lives. They don't believe in freedom of religion. They don't believe in freedom of speech. They don't believe in freedom of the press. They don't believe in freedom, period. And we do. That's why we're still a target. but that's why we'll prevail in the long run, because deep in everybody's soul is that deep desire. And you know what I believe it's deep in everybody's soul? Because I believe it's the Almighty God's gift to every soul on the face of the Earth. {APPLAUSE}

You about ready, Leo? Let me say one other thing. They asked me -- you know, I've been asked, and they say, is there a timetable of withdrawal from Iraq? Here's the answer to that. You don't set timetables. You don't want the enemy to say, okay, we'll just wait them out. The timetable is as soon as possible. And it's going to be based upon the willingness and the capacity of the Iraqi troops to fight the enemy. And so our mission -- our mission is to provide training and command structure and officer training to the Iraqis so they can defend their own freedom. That's what they want to do. I talk to their leadership all the time. And like any independent free country, they want to defend themselves. And our job is to help them defend themselves. And when they do, and when they're ready, our troops will come home with the honor they have earned. {APPLAUSE}

And as freedom spreads -- as freedom spreads in parts of the world that have not known freedom, our children and grandchildren are more likely to grow up in peace. And that's what we want. We want to spread the peace. {APPLAUSE}

Let me talk about Social Security. You know, people say, gosh, that's a pretty tough issue to be bringing up. We've got a war to fight, why are you bringing up Social Security? Here's why: The job of the President is to confront problems, not to pass them on to future generations or future Presidents. {APPLAUSE} That's the way Montana people think. If you see a problem, go fix it. {APPLAUSE} Don't theorize, don't pontificate, but fix it. And so the question is, do we have a problem?

First of all, let me explain why I think we -- I know we have a problem. When Social Security was designed, there were 16 workers for every beneficiary in 1950 --actually, designed in the '30s -- in 1950, there were 16 workers for every beneficiary. That meant it was a lot easier to afford that which the government promised. When you've got 16 people paying in for one person, it -- you can see why the system was solvent.

What's happened since the design of the system, however, is that people are living longer -- thankfully. {LAUGHTER} That's good news. {LAUGHTER} What else is happening since the system was designed is we had what's called the baby boomers -- that would be me, Baucus, others, you know -- {LAUGHTER} -- people whose hair is getting grayer on a regular basis. And we're fixing to retire in big numbers. So you're living longer and you've got bigger -- you've got big numbers retiring, and fewer workers paying into the system -- 3.3 workers per beneficiary. Plus, Congress, over the years, has promised an increase of benefits. So think about the math. Fewer people paying into the system, more people living longer, more people retiring, for greater benefits.

Now, that is -- and because Social Security is a pay-as-you-go system, there's not a great big trust of money. The money that goes in from your paycheck goes out to the beneficiaries. That's how it works. And so, obviously, as the demand for money increases as a result of more people retiring and people living longer and benefits going up, more has to come in.

Now, if you look at this chart up there, in 2018, the Social Security system goes negative. That means more money is going out than is coming into the system. And every year after that, as you can see, the cash deficit -- that is the money going out is greater than the money coming in -- increases. In 2027, it's about $200 billion a year. That's above and beyond the payroll taxes we're collecting. Ten years later, it's about $300 billion. Every year, the situation gets worse.

So you can imagine what will be happening if we don't do anything. You know, Congress is going to show up, and somebody says, we're $200 billion short. Where are you going to get the money? Well, you can tax somebody to get the money; you can get rid of the benefits that you promised; you can cut other programs; or you can keep borrowing debt. That's why I think we've got a problem.

Now, before I start talking about what I intend to do about it, I've got to make some things just as plain as I can. If you're a senior citizen today on Social Security, you don't have to worry about it. The trust has got plenty of money to take care of you.

I understand how this issue works. Everybody says, he's talking about Social Security, there goes my check. That's what happens all the time when they're talking about Social Security. You're in good shape. And if you're near retirement, 55 years or above, you're in good shape. Nothing changes. Those are the facts. The problem is, is that the younger workers have got a problem. And I think we have a duty to worry about our children and our grandchildren.

You know, 2018 may not -- may seem like a long way down the road for people who are running for office every two years. It's not that far down the road. If you've got a five-year-old child, that child will be 18 years old before you know it, and the Social Security system starts losing money. In 2042, the system will be broke. Again, for some of us in politics, that may seem like ages. You know, don't worry about it; 2042 seems like forever. And in my cases, of course, I'm not going to be around in politics. I'm moving on after four years. But, nevertheless, it's not that far. And the longer you wait, the harder it is to fix the problem.

So my judgment is -- and that's why I went in front of Congress yesterday, and said, okay, let's fix the problem. And I put all ideas on the table, except for running up payroll taxes. If you've got a good idea, bring it. No President, I don't think, has ever said that when it comes to Social Security. Some of you veterans may remind me whether that's the case, or not. I don't think so. I'm willing to stand up with the Congress, I don't care if it's a Republican idea, Democrat idea, independent idea -- bring them forward. Let's work together and fix the system. {APPLAUSE}

There are a lot of ideas out there -- thank you all -- there's a lot of ideas out there. I mentioned some of the authors of the ideas last night. I've got one myself that I think is a very interesting idea -- along with others. What I'm about to tell you will not permanently fix Social Security -- by the way, there's no need just to put a Band-Aid on the deal. If we're going to get after it, let's fix it permanently. Let's let people look back generations from now and say, I appreciate the way the Congress and the President worked together to do what was right on Social Security. {APPLAUSE}

So let me give you an idea that I think is worth considering. I thought it was worth considering so much, I put about five paragraphs in my speech into it, you know. {LAUGHTER} And it's this: I believe you ought to be able -- allowed to take some of your own money, payroll taxes, and set up a personal retirement account, on a voluntary basis. And the reason why I believe that is because the rate of return in your account will be greater than the rate of return on the money you're getting in Social Security. And that's important. Because if you're a younger worker and set aside some of your money that would normally be going into the trust, into a persona account, over time, that rate of return grows and accumulates. And you end up with a nest egg, I guess is the best way to put it -- a nest egg that will then complement your Social Security checks when you finally retire.

Now, there's a lot of questions about this, of course -- can you take it to the lottery? Is that considered an investment? Can you take your payroll taxes and set up a fund and go to the lottery or the track or shoot some dice? The answer is, no. {LAUGHTER} Obviously. You have to have a conservative mix of stocks and bonds. And there are a lot of funds that are conservatively tailored so you can get a reasonable rate of return. Obviously, the lower the risk, the lower the rate of return. But it should be a rate of return greater than that which you're earning in the Social Security trust, and that's important over time.

Secondly, you just can't once you retire pull it all out. In other words, there will be a phased withdrawal in order to make sure that the Social Security benefits you get, coupled with the money coming out of your own personal account is done in such a way to help you retire.

Third, there are ways to make sure your fund can avoid swings in the market at the very end of -- right before you retire. So there's some wise things we can do, just like we do for the federal government employees, see? They've got this plan; it's called the thrift savings plan. My attitude is, if it's good enough for people working in the federal government, it ought to be good enough for people working elsewhere in America. And I -- {APPLAUSE}

I like the idea of you owning something. I love an ownership society. We want more people owning their own home. We want people owning their own business. We want people owning their own farm. We want people owning and managing their own health care accounts. And I think it makes sense to have people owning and managing their own retirement account. {APPLAUSE}

So we're going to talk about Social Security. And by the way, this will be phased in. I know they're throwing out all kinds of numbers -- $1 trillion, $2 trillion, $3 trillion. When you get to the federal government, we -- it's no longer millions or billions, it's trillions at the federal government. It's amazing, isn't it? Anyway, we're going to phase it in. That doesn't all happen -- happen at once. I think it's important to -- gradually phase in the idea of personal accounts so younger workers can get used to it, and so that the plan is more affordable, so it's more fiscally sound, fiscally responsible to fade it in. And we put out such a plan that will help people understand that we can do this without busting the budgets. And that's important for people to understand, as well. No, this is doable. It's just going to take some political will.

Now, I want to talk to somebody who professes to be an expert. Actually, he is an expert. We were in Fargo earlier, and he handled himself brilliantly for a professor. No. {LAUGHTER} Jeff Brown, from the University of Illinois, knows the subject well. He is obviously a good sport. He takes a pretty good needle. And -- but tell us -- just give us -- back me up. You've studied the issue. {LAUGHTER} Now, I've come here and they say, what do you expect the President to say. Put some expertise out there. 

{/speech}
