{title} President Discusses Strengthening Social Security in North Carolina {/title}
{event} BTI Center For The Performing Arts, Raleigh, North Carolina {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} February 10, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you all for coming. {APPLAUSE} Thanks for coming. Okay. Thanks for the warm welcome. We got a lot of work to do here. {LAUGHTER}

{AUDIENCE-MEMBER} {COMMENT="Inaudible"} {/AUDIENCE-MEMBER} {APPLAUSE}

Okay. Listen, we're here to talk about an important subject. And I want to thank some of our fellow citizens for agreeing to join me up here on the stage. It's not easy, frankly, to go from kind of a quiet civilian life to agree to sit up here with the President and all the cameras. {LAUGHTER} But I think you're going to find this to be a very interesting dialogue about Social Security.

I've got some things I want to say before we talk about Social Security. First, I send greetings from Laura. {APPLAUSE} On the way out she said, when you get down to North Carolina, tell everybody hello, and make sure that the panelists get to talk. {LAUGHTER} She knows me well. {LAUGHTER}

I know that Elizabeth Dole helped set up this event. I am -- she is staying back in Washington because there are crucial votes coming up. I believe that one of our -- an important initiative, and that is to bring reasonable legal reform on class-action lawsuits, will pass. {APPLAUSE} So she and Senator Burr are staying back to vote. I hope you excuse them -- I certainly did. {LAUGHTER}

I'm also pleased that a person who set an example of what it means to be a person who sticks to his principles and is a fine United States Senator has joined us, Senator Jesse Helms. Thank you for coming. Proud you're here. {APPLAUSE} It sounds like to me they still remember you. {LAUGHTER}

I want to thank the statewide officials who are here. They were bravely standing at the base of Air Force One when I arrived, and the wind was blowing hard, but they, nevertheless, stuck it out and greeted me. I want to thank you for being there. I want to thank the local folks who are here.

I met a fellow named Jim Van Strien. He's what I call a USA Freedom Corps volunteer. He works for the RSVP program. He's been helping to welcome U.S. servicemen and women home. He's the kind of fellow who -- {APPLAUSE} Let me finish, and then you can thank him. He's the kind of fellow who's taken time out of his day to volunteer to make somebody else's life better.

Now, the strength of this country is the fact that we've got millions of citizens who are willing to do so. The true strength of America is we've got people of open hearts and great spirit who are willing to make society a better place as a result of volunteering. If you're interested in serving our country, feed the hungry, find shelter for the homeless, put your arm around somebody who hurts and say, I love you, brother or sister.

Jim, thank you for setting such a good example, and welcome. {APPLAUSE}

The world is getting more free and, therefore, a future generation of Americans and kids around the world is more likely to live in peace. {APPLAUSE} I hope you are as enthused as I am about what has happened recently in the course of world events. Think about the elections in Afghanistan. Millions of people voted for the first time in ages for a President. And the first voter was a woman. {APPLAUSE} And that's miles away from a time when people were tormented by idealogues of hatred called the Taliban.

And the world is better off when a part of the world that has longed for freedom sees a free society emerge in Afghanistan. And then there was an election in the Palestinian Territories. And I've been impressed by President Abbas's willingness to stand and say we must defeat terror and establish a democracy in order to achieve peace with our friend Israel. And I look forward to working -- I look forward to working toward peace in that part of the world.

And then we had the elections in the Ukraine, and -- which are a beginning of a -- a continuing of a democracy movement in a part of the world that hadn't known freedom for ages. And then of course, some -- a week ago last Sunday, against all odds and defying all expectations, millions of Iraqi citizens said we will not be terrorized, we want to be free. And they went to the polls. {APPLAUSE}

Freedom is on the march. And my job and the job of the United States of America, with our friends and allies, is to continue to promote free societies, because I understand freedom equals peace. And I believe we have an obligation, as we protect our homeland from terrorist thugs, to make the world a more peaceful place for generations to come. And I'm looking forward to the challenge. I'm looking forward to going to Europe in a couple of weeks to say, listen, we share a lot of values. We believe in human dignity, human rights. Most of all, we believe that every soul should be free.

I laid out in my inauguration address what I think is a noble goal for generations to come, to end tyranny in our world, and the United States of America, working with friends and allies, over time has got the capacity to do so. {APPLAUSE}

One of the challenges we face is how to make sure this economy of ours continues to grow. The national unemployment rate is down to 5.2 percent; the unemployment rate here in North Carolina is lower than the national unemployment rate. That's all good. But we must continue to make sure that we advance reasonable economic policy so the entrepreneurial spirit is strong, small businesses can flourish, and most importantly, people can find work.

I'm looking forward to working with Congress to put reasonable plans in place to make that happen. One of the most important things that I've done in the new term is to submit a budget that says, let's address the deficit. I've heard from business leaders, entrepreneurs, small business owners, Republicans, Democrats, congressmen, senators, all say we got an issue with the deficit. I said, fine. I have a responsibility to submit a budget; I did. It's lean, it's focused, it sets priorities, and it says if we've got programs that aren't working, let's get rid of them, for the sake of the taxpayer. {APPLAUSE}

And I'm looking forward to the deliberations, and I'm looking forward to working with people on both sides of the aisle to get a lean budget out. That's what the American people expect, and that's what I'm going to sign.

I'm looking forward to working with Congress to continue to make sure health care is available and affordable. One of the ways to do that is we need medical liability reform out of the United States Senate. {APPLAUSE} It's important for people to receive justice when they're harmed, but it's important for the scales of justice to be balanced. And the scales of justice are not balanced. Too many doctors are getting sued by frivolous lawsuits, which is running up the cost of medicine, which is costing taxpayers money, which is driving good doctors out of business. It is time for the United States Congress to pass national medical liability reform. {APPLAUSE}

I'm looking forward to working with Congress to get an energy bill out. We've been debating energy for four years. We don't need any more words on energy. It's time for them to get a bill to my desk. I have laid out a blueprint on how to get there. It encourages conservation; it encourages the use of renewable sources of energy. It says, let's -- why don't we be wise about the use of nuclear power. I believe we can expand safe nuclear energy. I know we ought to be exploring in environmentally friendly ways for natural gas here in the continental and in the state of Alaska. All of this is aimed to make us less dependent on foreign sources of energy. And Congress needs to act and get a bill to my desk. {APPLAUSE}

On taxes, I'm looking forward to getting the bipartisan commission's report to me on how to simplify the code. But in the meantime, I know this: We got to make the tax relief we passed permanent. We ought not to be running up taxes on entrepreneurs. {APPLAUSE}

I look forward to working with Congress on education matters. I will not let the United States Congress roll back the reforms of the No Child Left Behind Act. The No Child Left Behind Act is challenging the soft bigotry of low expectations. We're raising standards. We believe every child can learn, and we expect every school to teach. And we want to know, in return for our money, whether or not schools are meeting expectations. {APPLAUSE}

And I know you've got a fantastic community college system here in North Carolina. And I intend to make sure that the work force programs utilize this fantastic community college system so people are able to get the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century. And so we'll continue to work with Congress on education matters.

But I'm here to talk about an issue that is going to be an interesting experience in dealing with the Congress. {LAUGHTER} And that is Social Security -- formerly known as the third rail of American politics. {LAUGHTER} That meant, if you touched it, there would be certain political death. I believe the job of a President is to confront problems and not pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. That's what I believe. {APPLAUSE} Thank you. Thank you, all. Okay, thank you. Thank you for the warm welcome.

I see a problem and I want to discuss with you why I see a problem. For those who got to worry about the politics of Social Security, let me just give you my perspective. I ran on it, twice. {LAUGHTER} I said, elect me and I will do the best I can to work with Congress to strengthen the system for all; give me a chance to be the President and I will take the issue head on. I did so in the 2000 campaign. Obviously, the issue wasn't solved, and so I did it again in 2004. I believe candidates are rewarded, not punished, for taking on tough issues. I say that to give assurance to the members of Congress who may feel somewhat fearful of taking on the issue.

Secondly, I intend to campaign on this issue around the country. This is one of two stops today. Right after my State of the Union speech I went to five states, and I'm going to keep traveling the country talking about the problem of Social Security, assuring seniors that nothing changes, and saying I'm willing to discuss all options with members of the United States Congress. And I'm looking forward to it. I like to get out of Washington. I like to talk to people. But I also know that when the people speak, people in the Congress listen. So I'm kind of sharing with you a little bit of my strategy about how to move this issue forward.

So what's the problem? The problem is, is that Social Security -- the basic assumptions of Social Security are shifting dramatically from when Social Security was founded. In 1950, there were 16 workers per one putting money into the system -- which means that when somebody retired, there's 16 workers contributing to that person's retirement. Today there's 3.3 workers contributing for each beneficiary. And when youngsters retire, it's going to be 2.1 -- two workers per beneficiary. In other words, the burden of paying for retirees is increasing on workers. That's part of the equation.

The second thing that has changed is -- is that life expectancy has changed. It used to be 60 years was life expectancy; today it's 77. I suspect over the next decade, it will continue to increase. I certainly hope so. {LAUGHTER} As well, baby boomers are getting ready to retire. That's me -- and you. {LAUGHTER} And do you realize today, for example, there are 37 million people receiving Social Security benefits. In the year 2031, there will be 71 million people. Those are baby boomers. Baby boomers are living longer. And more people are retiring. So part of the equation is more people will be receiving benefits longer than anticipated when the system was first set up.

Thirdly, benefits promised to people like me are dramatically higher than benefits given to today's retirees. Politicians, over time, say, we'll just -- elect me, I'll increase the benefits.

So when you think about it, when you add up the equation, you've got more people living longer, receiving greater benefits, being supported by fewer people. And to me, that says, we got a problem. And as a matter of fact, the numbers say that. There is a chart over here that says "Cost of Inaction," because in 2018, the system goes red. That means there's more money going out of the system than coming into the system. The leading edge of baby boomers are retiring; they're living longer; benefit structures are bigger; fewer people paying in -- the system goes negative.

Now, some of you probably think there is a kind of -- a bank, a Social Security trust bank. But that's not what's happened over time. Every dollar that goes into Social Security has been paid out, either to retirees or government programs. It is a pay-as-you-go system; it is a flow-through system. There is no kind of -- there are empty promises, but there's no pile of money that you thought was there when you retired. That's not the way the system works.

To make matters worse, as more baby boomers retire, as people live longer, as more benefits kick in, the cash deficit increases. So, for example, in 2027, the government is going to have to come up $200 billion more to meet the promises that we've made, above and beyond payroll taxes. Every year from 2018 to when the system goes broke in 2042, the cash deficits required to meet promises increase. That says to me we've got a problem.

Now, I know 13 years doesn't sound like a lot -- 2018 -- it may seem like a lot to people whose perspective is maybe two years. But as I told you, I think we've got to anticipate problems, particularly on this issue, because the longer we wait, the more difficult the solutions become. That's just a fact.

And so step one of my strategy is to continue saying to the American people, we have got a serious problem. In other words, sometimes they say, is it serious, is it a crisis -- look, whatever you want to call it, just look at the chart and you come up with the conclusions. It is serious because if Congress says no to the President, we're not going the move forward on this, imagine what the solutions will be when the $200 billion hits, or the $210 billion a year, or the $300 billion. I mean, you're looking at either major tax increases, major cuts in benefits, major cuts in other government programs or massive debt. And so now is the time to move. And that's what I'm saying to the Congress.

The second -- second goal of mine is to make sure our people who have retired, our senior citizens, and people who were born before 1950 know that nothing changes. That's important for you to understand. I fully understand a lot of people are very dependent upon their Social Security check. And when they hear somebody like me saying we're going to strengthen the system, their immediate reaction in some cases is to go, oh, that means I'm not going to get my check. You might remember those campaigns around, which I'm sure you've seen them in states where people say, elect somebody and he's going to take away your check. That happened to me, for example. They said, old George W. gets in, you're not going to get your check. Fortunately, they got their check after I got in, so they kind of rung hollow in 2004.

You'll hear the same kind of thing being put out there, that seniors need to worry about this. And I'm going to spend a lot of time assuring people who've retired or are near retired, that nothing changes. The system when we talk about insolvency, the insolvency issue doesn't relate to you. It relates to your grandchildren. And that's the issue we're confronted with: What do we do about the retirees' grandchildren? As I said in my State of the Union, we have an obligation to do what others have done for my generation and that's to leave a -- leave a better world behind. And that's why I was willing to dedicate as many words as I did in the State of the Union to what used to be the third rail of American politics, Social Security.

Now, it's one thing to define the problem; it's another thing to be a part of the solution. And I have an obligation as the President not just to define the problem, but to encourage dialogue by putting out some ideas of my own. I stood up in front of the Congress and said, in order to truly fix it, in order to have a permanent solution, all options are on the table, except for running up payroll taxes.

And that means a lot of different things. Democrats, like Senator Moynihan, who Senator Helms served with, had some really constructive ideas as to how to address the root cause of a -- of the problems with Social Security. President Clinton had some ideas; former Democrat Congressman Tim Penny. And the ideas range from raising the retirement age, to delaying benefits, to calculating benefits not based upon wage increase, but price increase. A little esoteric here, but, in other words, there's some serious ideas on the table to how to permanently fix Social Security.

And that's why I said to the Congress, all ideas are on the table, and if you got a good idea, bring it forward. Now is the time for people from both sides of the aisle to address the problem. And I'm willing to listen to anybody's idea. And I'm looking forward to a good, constructive dialogue about how to seriously address the problem, making sure that those who've retired have nothing to worry about and, at the same time, making sure there's a Social Security system for younger people coming up.

I put out some ideas and I want to talk about one of them that I hope you find interesting. I certainly did; otherwise I wouldn't have put it out. {LAUGHTER} And that is as a way to allow younger workers to more nearly -- or come closer to the promises that have been made, but can't be fulfilled, we should allow younger workers to take some of their own money -- their own payroll taxes -- and set it aside as a personal retirement account. This is a novel idea for Social Security. But it's not -- {APPLAUSE} It's a novel idea for Social Security; it is not a novel idea for federal employees. There is such a thing that's called a thrift savings plan, which allows federal employees to take some of their own money and invest it in stocks and bonds, so as to increase their retirement benefits.

And why does that happen? Because when you're able to get a rate of return on money invested, over time that money grows, that money accumulates, that money expands. And so I believe younger workers ought to be allowed to set up a personal account and invest in stocks and bonds so that their money can increase faster, at a faster rate than that which their money increases in the Social Security system. That's what I believe ought to happen. {APPLAUSE}

And so -- that's called the compounding rate of interest. Just trying to show off a little bit, kind of -- {LAUGHTER} Not bad for a history major. {LAUGHTER} Let me give you an example of what I'm talking about. By the way, our plan is one where I believe we ought to phase in the accounts so they're more affordable, so that the transition costs are more manageable to get to such accounts. I believe ultimately a worker ought to be allowed to put 4 percent of the payroll tax aside as a -- 4 percent of the 12 -- as a -- in the personal account. So money stays in the system, but money also would be allowed to grow with interest. Your option, by the way. Younger workers shouldn't be forced to do this. Younger workers -- if you're interested in this, you can do so.

Now, if you're a worker who earns $35 a year over your lifetime, and this system were in effect where you could put 4 percent of your payroll taxes in a personal account, and you start at age 20, by the time you retire, your personal account would grow to $250,000. That's compounding rate of interest.

A couple of guidelines that need to be -- I mean, you just got to understand there will be guidelines, like there are for the employee thrift -- federal employee thrift savings plan. There's got to be -- you can't say, let's have a good retirement system, and let somebody take their money down to the lottery and invest it. That's not a wise investment, with all due respect to the lottery players. In other words, there's got to be a -- certain guidelines, a conservative mix of stocks and bonds. We don't want people taking their money and investing in high flyers. There's a way to manage risk and get a better return than that which is in the Social Security trust. I mean, there's all kinds of people that are expert at this.

As a matter of fact, that's what the thrift savings plan does -- is says, here are some options for you, easy to understand options, which will defy those who say certain people aren't capable of investing -- a concept which I totally reject, by the way. {APPLAUSE} The person with the $250,000 account couldn't take it all out the moment he retires, or she retires, and spend it. In other words, there's a -- there would be a -- guidelines for a draw-down.

You see, the money coming out of the personal account is to complement the Social Security money, however much is still available after the congressional reforms. So it's a complement to Social Security. It is to mirror, it's to help out, it's to enable you to retire.

There's other benefits, however, to a personal account, besides growing faster than the money if it were to stay with the federal government. One, it's your money. And that's an interesting idea, isn't it? It's your money to begin with, and it's your money at the end. And you can do with it what you want. You can't take it to the lottery, you can't gamble, you can't try to increase it with silly investments, and you can't pull it all out at once. In other words, you have to use it for retirement. On the other hand, if you choose not to spend it, you can pass it on to somebody you choose. {APPLAUSE}

Obviously, I didn't listen to Laura. {LAUGHTER} I've got some other things to say real quick.

The current system today -- think about this -- if you work for 30 years and you start at age 20, and you're putting money in the Social Security system, and you die, that money that you put in the system, if your survivors are over 18 years old, goes away. I think it makes sense to try to encourage people, particularly for the security of their families, to be able to have something to pass on, beyond other things they're going to pass on.

I like the idea of having an account where people say, I own this, and are able to look at a quarterly statement to watch their own asset base grow. And I like people being able to say, I've got an account that the government cannot take away; it's mine. {APPLAUSE}

Some people say, well, you can't afford to do this. My answer is you can't afford not to do it -- if you look at the chart. {APPLAUSE} And I'm looking forward to working with the Congress. I've done my part, I've laid it out there. I'm going to work hard, I'm going to spend a lot of time talking to the people about this issue. And I've put out some interesting ideas. And I'm looking forward to people assuming leadership in the House and the Senate, on both sides of the aisle. And I'm willing to listen to their ideas. For the sake of the country, for the sake of a younger generation of Americans, we must act. {APPLAUSE}

Andrew Biggs. We are here with one Andrew Biggs, a fine lad, as you can see. {LAUGHTER} What do you do? Work for me, of course. {LAUGHTER} Tell them what you do, Andrew, please -- Andrew and I have done this before, see, so I'm used to needling him. {LAUGHTER} 

{/speech}
