{title} 2006 Liberty Medal Presentation to Presidents Bush and Clinton {/title}
{event} Philadelphia, PA, National Constitution Center {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} October 5, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thanks for that introduction. It's a great honor to be here, and I want to salute the elected officers who are here -- Senator Santorum, Governor Rendell, Senator Specter, and the Mayor. It's a pleasure to have them with us, and, Joe, we appreciate your leadership in all of this, and what you've done here for this Center.

Let me start by thanking the National Constitution Center for this high honor, an honor I will always treasure. Of course, I'm honored to accept this award with my co-honoree. A lot of people were surprised, to put it mildly, when President Clinton and I teamed up last year, twice, first on the tsunami relief as we've seen, and then on hurricane rebuilding along the Gulf Coast.

I've told the story a million times of how Barbara had taken to calling us the political odd couple. And how the President -- the President -- joked that after Bill awoke following his heart surgery, all of his loved ones were there -- Hillary, Chelsea, and yours truly.

Suffice it to say, I am grateful to the President for giving me a chance to work with 42, as he's now known in our family. The experience we have had traveling to Asia last year is something I will never forget, and if you've ever had an ego problem, don't travel with President Clinton to the Maldives. It was like traveling with a rock star. Get out of the way, will you, Clinton's coming. It was terrible.

It was the same thing when we went to Mississippi and New Orleans and Alabama last fall. The more that we saw of the tsunami -- more devastation, more heartbreak -- and I was in New Orleans last week, and while the Big Easy still has a hard trip to recovery, I saw hope and resilience and determination in the eyes and voices of people whom I visited. So it's been a joy to work with Bill Clinton, but the truth is, it shouldn't have surprised people when we teamed up. After all, when I was President and he was heading the National Governor's Association, he took a leadership role in a reform movement in American education. We worked together on that.

I helped him lobby the Congress to pass NAFTA, and then in 1997 we came together right here in Philadelphia with Presidents Ford and Carter to promote volunteerism. And true enough, there may have been one or two lapses of personal etiquette on the 1992 campaign trail. For example, I really did not think our dog, Millie, knew more about foreign policy than the governor of Arkansas, but hey, we were in the heat of the battle then. You almost get sharp, you know, which leads me to a key point, that sharp elbows do come out in national politics.

I've noticed a lot of people are talking about the poisonous political atmosphere today, and no doubt this has been a rough political year, but you'll have a hard time convincing me that politics is tougher and uglier in 2006 than it was during the 1960s, or during the 1860s for that matter. The thing is, every generation thinks their politics are rougher than any other time in our history, just as every chief executive feels that their media coverage was the most offensive. After all, President Washington once complained that a newspaper referred to him in terms that could scarcely be applied to a common pickpocket, and it was the same thing with Chester Arthur. Many of you remember old Chester, I'm sure.

In 1861, President-Elect Lincoln had to travel incognito to Washington for his first inauguration for fear of his safety, so polarized was our nation at that traumatic time, and what makes these regular assaults on our political sensibilities and the outrages of the press bearable is the same living, breathing Constitution under whose aegis we would gather here this evening.

So, as I accept this wonderful award for my work with my former political adversary, I do so also in defense of the proper role of partisanship in our politics. The fact that Bill Clinton and I have come together like we have does not in any way mean that we've placed our deeply held convictions in a blind trust, or even in a lock box, thank you Al Gore, and rest assured I'm still every bit the loyal Republican and defender of the President, and no one needs to ask where President Clinton's partisan loyalties lie. That's as it should be.

Gathered as we are in the heart of this political season, let's not forget that our nation -- indeed, any nation -- benefits from a vigorous debate on the issues, from the competition of ideas in the political marketplace. It doesn't matter if it's a Democrat versus Republican, or Liberal or Conservative, or Coke versus Pepsi. Competition is a good thing, a needed thing, indeed the very thing on which our national progress is built. Now, would I like to see more bipartisanship in Washington? Absolutely. Do I resent the attacks on the President's character? You bet. We need less cynicism and more civility to help us overcome the deficit of decency, but because of our Constitution, our system is resilient enough to withstand the gusts and gales of even the most insidious political season.

So thank you for this wonderful award, which I'll always treasure, but more importantly, thank you for the work you do to continue bringing the message of our Constitution, a timeless document which continues to change and transform our world to the masses. The work of our founders remains as current and timely as ever. Without your leadership and selfless efforts, fewer people would be touched by its magic. Thank you very, very much. {APPLAUSE}

President Clinton: Mr. Torsella, Mr. Mayor, Governor, Senators, I thank you all. Thank you, Charlie Gibson, for being here. You, too, have a hard job. No president thinks he gets good enough press, I can tell you that. I'd like to thank Kariel and Teuku for being here, and for reminding us of what our labors were all about. And I thank you very much for this award.

I had the great honor to come here in 1993 to be part of the presentation of this award to two friends of mine, Nelson Mandela and President de Klerk, two people who reached across a far greater partisan divide than ever separated President Bush and me. A decade ago, you gave it to Shimon Peres and to the late King Hussein, two other friends of mine -- and you might have given it to Yitzhak Rabin had he not been killed -- three men who reached across a far greater divide. But there was one other tandem who got this award that I want to mention tonight, because of their unique contribution to understanding what President Bush has just said and the meaning of this award: Watson and Crick, who discovered the double helix, the structure of the human gene, which led to a decades-long search to understand the structure of the human being itself through the gene. I had the great good fortune to be President in 2000, when we reached the culmination of the ability to decode the human genome, the very building block of life, a big multinational effort that had been strongly supported by my predecessor, President Bush.

They found an astonishing thing: that human beings -- all of us, all across the world, Republicans and Democrats, black and white, Africans, Asians, Europeans, you name it -- we are all 99.9 percent the same genetically. So we all think about how smart the Founding Fathers were. By reason alone, they came here and said that they pledge their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honors to do what? To form a more perfect union. They knew we weren't perfect. They knew we would never be perfect. But they knew we could always be more perfect.

I completely agree with everything George said about partisanship. I also want to thank the President for giving us the chance to work together. I never asked him and he never asked me to discard our convictions where we honestly disagreed. But if you do it in the right way, you are always yearning and working for that more perfect union.

Why were we able to do this in the aftermath of the tsunami and Katrina? That's what I want you to think about. Because when people are broken and they have lost everything, then all the things we spend most of our time and life on -- our differences, that one-tenth of one percent that all of us, every single one of us, spends over 90 percent of our lives on -- all of a sudden they just evaporate.

I was walking through a refugee camp in Indonesia with the elected head of the camp and his wife and their beautiful son, and I said to the interpreter, “I believe that is the most beautiful boy I ever saw in my life.” She said, yes, he is, and before the tsunami hit he had nine brothers and sisters, and they're all gone. We could tell you Katrina stories that would break your heart and some that would soar your spirits, but the point is, all of our differences just fade away.

So, I accept this award with gratitude, with a man I have genuinely always liked and always admired. I can now tell you, and may all the Democrats forgive me this close to the election, I love George Bush. I do. And I think that we figured out how we're supposed to do this. I've developed a good relationship with the current President, and I told him, “Look, I will never ask you to change what you believe. You won't ask me to change what I believe. You say what you believe. I say what I believe, but I'll say it with respect, and if ever I can do anything to help our country in good conscience, and you want me to do it, I'll do it.” That's what I ask you to think about.

How can you live with the importance of the one-tenth of one percent and not forget the 99.9 percent? That's what the Founders knew, and that's what we all know when there's a tsunami. That's what we all know when there's a Katrina. When that young man came up here all the way from Aceh in Indonesia, studying at Texas A & M, when that young woman came up here from all the things she's been through, and when this wonderful poet, having suffered through Katrina, came here and read this poem, all of you thought about what you had in common with them, didn't you?

So, I accept this award with great humility and gratitude that I was given a chance after a long and eventful career to be reminded that the Founders knew that what we have in common is more important than our interesting and significant differences, that we strive for a more perfect union, not by obliterating our differences, but just by remembering that we're 99.9 percent the same. If we could remember it every day, we'd make a lot better use of that one-tenth of one percent, and the Founders would be proud. Thank you and God bless you. 

{/speech}
