{title} President Discusses Medical Liability Reform and Health Care in Ohio {/title}
{event} Canton Palace Theater, Canton, Ohio {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} October 22, 2004 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

See, this is -- the story is being repeated all across the country. I was -- in Pennsylvania yesterday, OB/GYNs can't practice. Women have to drive miles in order to find a doc. This is not the quality of life that we expect here in America. And it's caused by frivolous lawsuits. Make no mistake about it, it is a legal culture. {APPLAUSE}

When you're out rounding up the vote, or if you're listening and trying to determine who you're for, remember the stories up here, remember the stories of good-hearted docs who are worried about practicing their -- their skill. And remember the story about moms who are deeply concerned about their child. This is a big issue in this campaign.

Now, I want to talk about a couple of other issues, and then we'll all go home and start working. Actually, I'm going down to Florida, you're going to go home and start working. {LAUGHTER} The -- and I'm not going down there to sit on the beach, either. {LAUGHTER} I'm going down there to campaign.

Two other -- a couple of other things. I talk about time of change, and these are changing times. Some things don't change, the values we try to live by don't change: courage and compassion, reverence and integrity. And we stand for a culture of life in which every person matters and every being counts. We stand for institutions like family and marriage, which are the foundations of our societies. {APPLAUSE} And we stand for judges, federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law. {APPLAUSE}

Talking about education and health care, these are very important issues. But let me say to you that it all goes to naught if we don't secure this country, that the security of the American people is the most important responsibility of the President. If we show any uncertainty or weakness in this decade, this world of ours will drift toward tragedy. This isn't going to happen so long as I'm your President. {APPLAUSE}

Let me talk to you -- I want to talk to you about some of the lessons that I've learned as your President after September the 11th. First of all, we face an enemy which has no conscience. They are cold-blooded. Therefore, you can never hope for the best with them. You cannot negotiate with them. You can't say, oh, well, maybe we'll sign a peace treaty, and therefore, they'll change their ways. The only way to secure America, to keep us safe, is to find them and bring them to justice before they hurt us again. And therefore, any strategy has got to be one that is consistent, firm, and resolve and never relenting. {APPLAUSE}

Hold on a second. Hold on for a -- I've got some more I've got to tell you.

Secondly, this is a different kind of war. You've got to understand, I wish I wasn't talking about war. No President ever wants to be the President of a country -- of our country during war. War is horrible. But it's necessary to be realistic during these times. Our most solemn duty is to protect you. And it's a different kind of war than we're used to. It's a kind of war when you say something, you need to speak clearly and mean what you say.

And so when I said, if you harbor a terrorist, you're just as guilty as the terrorist, I meant what I said. I was speaking to the Taliban in Afghanistan. {APPLAUSE} And see, I was talking to the Taliban because they were providing safe haven for al Qaeda. Al Qaeda was training there. And we said, listen, get rid of al Qaeda. They didn't believe the United

States of America. But because of a great military and because I meant what I said, al Qaeda -- and the Taliban is no longer in control of Afghanistan, and al Qaeda is on the run.

We're making progress. Three-quarters of al Qaeda and their associates have been brought to justice. I assure you, we're after the rest of them. And the Taliban no longer is in power. And as a result of our action, America and the world are safer.

But I want -- I want you to tell your sons and daughters about what has taken place in an incredibly brief period of time. It wasn't all that long ago in Afghanistan that young girls were not allowed to go to school. Think about a society that was run by such barbarians that girls were not allowed to be educated. These ideologues of hate had a dark vision about the future. As a matter of fact, if their moms didn't toe the line, they'd be whipped in the public square and, sometimes, executed in a sports stadium. In defending ourselves and upholding doctrine, we liberated the people of Afghanistan. Twenty-five million people now live in freedom. Millions went to the polls to vote for their President, and the first voter was a 19-year-old woman. {APPLAUSE}

Three-and-a-half years ago, if you would have asked anybody whether or not women would be voting in Afghanistan for President, they would have said, you're crazy, you're wrong. And freedom is on the march. Darkness has turned to light in Afghanistan, and America is better off for it. We're better off to have an example of freedom in that part of the world. We're better off to have an ally in Afghanistan, an ally in the war on terror. And we're making progress in Iraq.

The third lesson of September the 11th, by the way, is we've got to take threats seriously before they fully materialize. You can't hope -- you cannot hope for the best. It used to be, prior to September the 11th that if we saw a threat, we could deal with it or not deal with it because we didn't ever think it could come home to hurt us. That's what we thought. That all changed on September the 11th. You better have a President who fully understands that. {APPLAUSE}

My opponent in his -- my opponent in his convention speech said, oh, we'll respond if attacked. That is a pre-September the 11th mind set, that is dangerous in the world in which we live. We've got to take threats seriously before they come to hurt us. And I saw a threat in Saddam Hussein. The world is better off with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. {APPLAUSE}

Thank you all.

There will be presidential elections there in January. Think how far that society has come from the days of mass graves and torture chambers.

You know, I told the story one time about the seven -- there's a lot of docs here and healers here. One of the most poignant stories of my presidency was when the Oval Office door opened and in came seven men from Iraq, all of whom had had their right hand cut off by Saddam Hussein because the currency of that country had devalued and he needed scapegoats. It's a true story, I'm telling you. And I asked one of the men there. I said, why you? He said he was a small merchant who needed gold to make jewelry, and he sold dinars to buy another currency so he could buy the gold, and it just happened to be on the day that Saddam was looking for a scapegoat. He found seven small merchants, seven individuals, hauled in, Xs carved in their foreheads, and their right hands cut off.

They had come to see me in the Oval Office because, guess what happened? Great compassion existed for them when their stories were known. They had been to Houston, Texas to get new hands put on. And the guy who did it is a guy I know, and he said, would you mind welcoming these citizens of the world into the Oval Office, which I was more than happy to do. They came in, they were in awe of the Oval Office, of course. You know, I'm kind of a weeper at times, and they were weeping, I was semi-weeping. The guy grabs a Sharpie with his new hand and folds it and writes a prayer in Arabic blessing the United States of America. I told the guy, I told him, I said, freedom is on the march in your country. There will be institutions greater than the people there. One of the great things about the American presidency is the office is always greater than the person. And someday in your country, the institutions will be bigger than the individuals, so that no leader will ever be able to pluck you out of society and cut off your right hand again.

People want to be free in this world. There will be election in Iraq. Listen, these enemies are trying to stop us. This guy Zarqawi, he's trying to stop the march of freedom. Freedom frightens these ideologues of hate. It is the worst thing that can happen to them. They can't stand the thought of free societies.

I love to tell the story about our friend Koizumi. I'm getting kind of wound up here, yeah. {LAUGHTER} She wants me to -- all right, hold on a second. I kind of felt the invisible hook, you know. {LAUGHTER}

I want to share this with you, though, because it's important for you to know my thinking about how to make this world a better place. I have a deep desire for your children to grow up in a peaceful world. I understand my duty to protect this country. I believe that liberty can transform societies. I believe that. And living proof of that is the fact that Prime Minister Koizumi is a good friend of Laura and mine. That probably doesn't seem much to some, but remember, it wasn't all that long ago, 60 years ago, that we were at war with the Japanese. The Japanese were the sworn enemy of the United States of America. My dad fought against the Japanese. I'm confident many of your relatives fought against the Japanese.

And after we won the war in World War II, Harry S Truman, President of the United States, and others in our country, believed in the power of liberty to transform an enemy into an ally. There was a lot of skeptics then. You can understand why. An enemy couldn't conceivably become a democracy, some would say. Why do we even care about working with a country that had conflicted so much harm on the citizens of this country?

But there was great faith in this view. And as a result of that, and as a result of helping Japan become a democracy, I sit down at the table with the Prime Minister of a former enemy, talking about how to keep the peace in a troubled world, talking about doing what we all want, and that is to extend the peace.

Someday, an American President will be sitting down with the duly elected leader of Iraq talking about the peace in the Middle East, and our children and our grandchildren will be better off for it. {APPLAUSE}

Hold on a second. I have a -- I believe that people want to be free. Freedom is not America's gift to the world. Freedom is the Almighty God's gift to each man and woman in this world. {APPLAUSE}

In the closing days of this campaign, it's very important for you to remind your friends and neighbors we have -- my opponent and I have a different vision about how to keep America secure. He talks in terms of a global test before we commit troops. I didn't make that up. The man was standing right there when he said it -- well, right here to my right during the debate. He wasn't there physically right now. I saw a lot of heads turn. {LAUGHTER}

Listen, I work with our friends and allies. We'll continue to build alliances. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries. {APPLAUSE}

I want to thank you all for coming to greet us. I want to thank you for your help. I know where I want to lead this country. I know what it takes to continue to expand this economy so people can find work. I've got a vision for a health care plan that empowers patients and docs. I believe in high standards in our schools, and we'll continue to press for educational excellence for every child. And I understand that the President of the United States must be consistent and firm and resolved in these troubling times.

You know, when I campaigned across your state, I said if you gave me -- in 2000 -- if you gave me a chance to serve, I would uphold the honor and the dignity of the office to which I had been elected. With your hard work, with your help, I will do so for four more years.

God bless. And thank you all for coming. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
