{title} President Discusses Strengthening Social Security in Mississippi {/title}
{event} Nissan North America Manufacturing Plant, Canton, Mississippi {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} May 3, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you all very much. Please be seated. Thank you very much for the warm welcome. My first observation is that I overdressed. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} And my second observation is, what an amazing facility you have here. {APPLAUSE} I mean, you're coming in on the highway, and all of a sudden the Nissan plant starts to -- shows up, and it lasts for a long time. So thanks for having me.

I want to congratulate the dreamers and doers who had this plant here, and I want to thank the workers for making it work. You can have a -- {APPLAUSE} You know what I know, you can have a pretty building, but if you don't have a motivated, highly-skilled work force, nothing is coming out. And I want to thank you all for showing the world that America can compete with anybody. {APPLAUSE}

I want to thank the folks who greeted me, Dan Guadette and Jim Morton, Greg Daniels, Dave Boyer -- thank you all for your hospitality. Thanks for letting us come. I particularly want to thank you all for taking time out of your busy work schedules. Hope it wasn't an inconvenience to get you off the line. {LAUGHTER} I know you want me to be short, so you can get back to work. {LAUGHTER} Okay, I won't be.

I've got something I want to talk about; I'm going to spend a little time on Social Security. This is an incredibly important subject for a lot of folks. This is going to be an educational experience, and I've asked some of our fellow citizens to join me up here, to make it clear to you all why I'm talking about this issue to begin with.

Before I do, there's some people I want to recognize, starting with the great Governor of the state of Mississippi, Haley Barbour. {APPLAUSE} Welcome, Governor. Thank you. And his wife, Marsha, the First Lady. {APPLAUSE} Haley married well, and so did I. I don't know about you, Haley, but my wife has become quite a one-liner, and she can deliver those one-liners. I called her Laura Leno Bush the other day. I love her dearly. She is a fabulous woman and a great First Lady. I'm sorry she's not with me here today. {APPLAUSE}

I want to thank the Lieutenant Governor, Amy Tuck, for joining us. Governor, thank you for being here. {APPLAUSE} Traveling with me is the Secretary of Education, Margaret Spellings. Thanks for coming, Madam Secretary. {APPLAUSE}

Here's what we believe in Washington, at least Margaret and I believe this: Every child can learn. We believe that. We don't accept a system that simply shuffles kids through school without teaching them how to read and write and add and subtract. I believe schools ought to set high expectations, and I believe we ought to measure to determine whether to not each child is learning to read and write. And by measuring, we can figure out who needs help early, before it's too late. I believe it when I say it that we should have no child left behind in America by insisting on high standards in our schools. {APPLAUSE}

I'm traveling with some high -- high power out of Washington today. Senator Trent Lott, head of the Budget Committee and a great friend, is with us. Thank you for being, Senator. {APPLAUSE} And Tricia Lott. That's not Tricia, that's the granddaughter. And the head of the Appropriations Committee, Senator Thad Cochran. Thank you both for being here. {APPLAUSE} The Senator and I traveled down on Air Force One together, and I guess the message I heard was, don't forget Mississippi, Mr. President. {APPLAUSE}

I appreciate Congressman Roger Wicker and Congressman Chip Pickering joining us today. Thank you guys for coming. {APPLAUSE} You might be aware of the Pickering name. I was proud to appoint Chip's dad, Judge Charles Pickering, to the Fifth Court. What a fine man he was and what a fine judge he was, and give him our best, please, Chip. {APPLAUSE}

Senator Travis Lee is with us. Senator, appreciate you coming. How about the Mayor of Canton, Fred Esco? Thank you, Mr. Mayor. Appreciate you. {APPLAUSE}

There are a lot of other folks. If I spent time naming them, you'd never get back to work. So I'm going to stop trying to name them all. But I do want to name one other person. I had the honor of meeting Ruth Wilson today, when I landed there in Jackson Airport. Ruth is a longtime volunteer. She helped organize a program at her church that has established a food pantry, an academic tutoring program, a clothes closet and a transportation service for the elderly. The reason I bring up Ruth is I want to remind you all that the great strength of America lies in the hearts and souls of our citizens.

Some people say the strength of America is our military; we've got a strong military and I can assure you we're going to keep it that way. {APPLAUSE} Some people say it's because our economy is the biggest in the world; that's important and we're going to keep the environment such that we'll continue to expand jobs across America. But the true strength of America is the fact we've got people like Ruth, who are willing to take time out of their lives to feed the hungry, to provide shelter for the homeless, to love a neighbor just like you would like to be loved yourself.

If you want to serve America, join the army of compassion; volunteer; make a difference in somebody's life. Help change this great country one heart and one soul at a time -- just like Ruth Wilson is. Ruth, thank you for coming. {APPLAUSE} I don't know where you are -- there you are. Welcome. {APPLAUSE}

I'm here to talk about the Social Security system. I've spent a lot of time working on this issue. I believe the job of a President is to confront problems and not pass them on to future Presidents or future Congresses. I think you expect people in office, like me, if we see a problem, to deal with it, and not say, oh, it's too big a political risk to deal with it; or maybe, I don't feel like dealing with it; or maybe, somebody says I shouldn't deal with it. I believe you send people to office to say here is a problem and to take it on squarely. And that's exactly why I'm sitting here today in Canton, Mississippi, because I see a problem in Social Security. And I believe I have a duty as your President to talk about the problem and talk about the solution.

And here's the problem: First, Franklin Roosevelt did a smart thing when it came time to setting up Social Security. Social Security checks have meant a lot to a lot of people. You know what I'm talking about. Your moms and dads or your grandparents count on that check. We've got some people sitting up here today who count on that check. I fully understand that when you're talking about Social Security, you're talking about something really important for a lot of people. And therefore, the first thing I want to leave you with is that if you're getting a Social Security check today, you're going to keep getting your check. I don't care what the propagandists say, I don't care what the politicians say, nobody is going to take your check away. And it's important for you to understand that. {APPLAUSE}

Matter of fact, if you were born in 1950 -- before 1950, nothing is going to change. In other words, the system is solvent for you. The problem is if you're a younger worker. And see, here's the problem: A bunch of baby boomers, just like me, are getting ready to retire. I reach retirement age in four years from now. That's a convenient time for me to retire. {LAUGHTER} I turn 62. The government says when you're 62, you can start drawing a check. There are a lot of us. As a matter of fact, there's 40 million retirees today. There's over 70 million that will be fully retired when the baby boomers retire completely. That's 70 million people, nearly double the amount of people today on Social Security. And secondly, we're living a lot longer.

I try to stay in shape. I exercise and all that, try to do -- make smart decisions with my body. I plan on living a long time, and so do a lot of other people my age. We're living longer than the previous generation. You've got a lot of people getting ready to retire who are living longer than the previous generation and we've been promised greater benefits. In other words, you have people running for office saying, vote for me, I'm going to make sure the baby boomers get greater benefits than the previous generation. So think about that man for a second, particularly if you're a younger worker. You got a lot of people like me living longer than ever before, been promised a lot of benefits, and there's fewer of you paying into the system.

You see, in 1950, there was 15 workers paying into the system for every beneficiary -- 16 workers for every beneficiary. Today there is 3.3 workers, fewer of you all paying for people like me, who are going to live longer and have been promised greater benefits.

Now, this is a pay-as-you-go system; you pay in, and we go ahead and pay out in Washington. You pay into the system -- some people say, well, there's a Social Security trust, we'll just take your money and hold it for you and give it back to you when you retire. That's not the way the system works. Part of my responsibility as your President is to tell you exactly what's going on, to lay it right out there for you to hear. The way it works in Social Security is your payroll taxes -- and you pay a lot of payroll taxes -- go into the system, and we're paying for retirees, like two of the people sitting up here today. And if we have any money left over, it goes to fund government programs. And all that's left is an IOU. That's how the system works. And so you're paying in, and it's going out. Nobody is -- you're not paying in and we're holding the money for you. You're paying in and it's going out. And in 2017, because baby boomers like me are getting ready to retire, the system starts to go in the red. In 2027, it's $200 billion a year in the red. In 2030, it's $300 billion; 2041 it is bankrupt. In other words, it's out.

So think about what I'm telling you. This is the math, folks, this is exactly what's going to take place unless we do something about it. I'm ready to -- people like me are retiring; we expect the government to make good on the promise, of course. But yet, we don't have enough money coming into the system to do so. So a lot of younger workers out there will be paying into a system that's bankrupt. And that's not fair.

And that's why I've taken on this issue, and that's why I'm going to continue traveling the country talking about the need to make sure the safety net of retirement is not only good for those who have retired, but it's good for a generation coming up.

Now, I talked about -- the other day I had a press conference, and I've spoken about this issue at the -- during my State of the Union address. I said, look, I not only have a responsibility to lay out the problem, I've got a responsibility to start helping people come up with the solution. It's one thing to lay out the problem; it's another thing to stand up and say here's some ideas to move forward, here's some ways we can work together -- first and foremost, future generations ought to receive benefits equal to or greater than the previous generation. So I think if you've been working all your life, you ought to receive a benefit equal to or greater than the promises that I got. I think that's a fair system. So in other words, that's an important principle for people to listen to.

Secondly, if you work hard and -- Social Security your entire life, you will not retire into poverty. The current system today, by the way, doesn't say that. The current system says you can work all your life and may end up in poverty. I don't think that's fair. I think people who have worked hard all their life and paying into the Social Security system ought to have a program that makes sure they won't retire into poverty.

And so, therefore, I believe benefits for lower-income workers should grow faster than benefits for higher-income workers, just to make sure that someone doesn't retire into poverty. You know, you hear all this talk about benefit cuts; we're talking about making sure benefits grow at the rate of inflation -- that's what we're talking about. You've been promised something; it ought to grow at the rate of inflation. Today, if you're an upper-income worker, it grows at the rate of wage growth. What I'm telling people is, is that ought to be applying for younger -- lower-income workers, but not all workers, so that the system can take care of those at the lower income scale. That makes sense to me.

I hope it makes sense to the United States Congress. I think Franklin Roosevelt would be proud to make sure of this. If you work all your life and contribute to Social Security you should not retire into poverty. I think that's a principle that makes sense. I think it's also important for our elected leaders, both Democrats and Republicans, to come to the table. The American people now understand we have a problem. And our leaders must choose: Do nothing and guarantee a massive tax hike, or a 30 percent benefit cut; or act now to keep the promises of Social Security for the 21st century.

The reason I say do nothing and get a tax hike -- if we don't do anything, it's estimated that younger workers will have to pay an 18-percent property -- payroll tax to make good on the promises. If you don't like 12, try 18. That's a lot. Payroll taxes are some of the highest taxes people pay here in America, and the idea of not having the political will to address Social Security and sticking younger workers with a high payroll tax doesn't make any sense to me.

Now, I know, sometimes Washington locks down. They say, well, we can't do this, it will help a Republican or help a Democrat. We've got to get rid of that kind of thinking in Washington, D.C. We're talking about -- {APPLAUSE}

I've got one other idea I want to talk to you about. By the way, the idea I laid out the other day about growing benefits at the rate of inflation for lower-income workers -- rate of inflation for upper-income workers, and rate of wages for lower-income workers, solves most of the problem, long-term problem. There's some other things we can work with Congress on to make sure that younger workers have got a system available for them.

Nothing changes for our seniors -- I'm talking about those of you born prior to 1950. I'm really talking about the younger workers, because if we don't do anything, you're going to have a huge bill to pay, one way or the other.

Now, I've got another idea that I want Congress to consider, and that is being able to take some of your own money, your payroll tax that you pay in the system, and the government allow you to set up a personal savings account. First of all, it's your money that you send into Washington -- not Washington's money, it's your money. We kind of like to spend your money up there; remember, this is a system you pay in, we take care of the retirees, any money left over we pay for other programs. Pretty soon the amount of money you send in is going to be less than the money owed to retirees and it's going to go into the red. That's why, if we don't do anything, you're going to end up paying more taxes, or we have to cut benefits. But it's your money.

Secondly, I think it's really important to recognize that if you grow your money at 4 percent or 5 percent, it's going to amount to a lot more money than if you keep it in the government and the government can grow it at 1.8 percent. It's how interest continues to grow. Some of you may have 401s, and you're watching that money begin to grow. And you hold it in there and it grows over time, and it starts to -- the growth starts to accumulate. It's called the compounding interest. And that's an important concept which is not a part of the system today.

For example, if you have a person who has worked all of her or his life at -- earned $35,000, and the government allows you to take a third of your payroll taxes and set it up in a savings account, and that account earns a reasonable rate of return, that, by the time you retire -- this is $35,000 over your lifetime, by the way -- and you can take out some of the money, a third of the money that you're paying into the government and set up an account that's your own, you'll end up with $250,000 by the time it comes to retire -- $250,000 plus that which the government can afford to pay you through Social Security. That's called a personal savings account. That's your asset. The government can't use it. It's yours. Government can't spend it on other programs. It's a hard asset.

Today, the program has got -- leaves behind IOUs, paper IOUs in a filing cabinet. I think when it comes time to make sure the safety net is available for younger Americans, we ought to make sure there's hard assets. You put money in the system; you ought to have an asset you call your own as part of your retirement plan.

Now, people ask me all the time, well, if I have -- if I have a personal savings account, what are the rules? Well, first of all, you can't take the money and put it in the lottery. In other words, this isn't a -- you can't shoot dice with it. This is part of a retirement plan, and so you'll be given the options to choose a conservative mix of bonds and stocks. If you don't want to take any risks, you can put it in government-backed Treasury bills. But a government-backed Treasury bill gets a greater rate of return than the money that we've got in the federal government. In other words, this is a chance to earn more -- watch your money grow in a better way through a conservative mix of bonds and stocks.

This isn't a new idea, by the way. Guess who gets to do this right now. Federal employees, members of the Senate and the House of Representatives. They've decided this is a pretty good idea for themselves. Seems like to me, if it's good enough for them it ought to be good enough for Nissan plant workers. {APPLAUSE}

The good news is, these four members of the Congress agree with me -- if it's good enough for them, it's good enough for you; that you ought to be given a chance, if you want -- and that's the other aspect, this is a voluntary personal savings account. This isn't the government saying you've got to do this. This is saying, if you want to do this, this option ought to be available. Some people may not want to do it -- I fully understand that. You stay in the Social Security system, and when Congress gets it reformed and I sign the bill, there will be a Social Security system. But I think you ought to be given the choice. As a matter of fact, I think the more government trusts people -- with their own money, in this case -- the better off the country is. {APPLAUSE}

Thirdly, I like the idea of people owning something. I don't believe that ownership ought to be available just for a privileged few. I don't believe that. I believe the more people are able to build assets they call their own, the better off the country is. I want more people saying, this is my asset, this is my money, and I'm going to leave it to whomever I choose. If I have a son or a daughter, I want to be able to pass that on to the next generation. {APPLAUSE}

In our country's history, the truth is a lot of people hadn't accumulated assets. And now is the time to change that. I want people to say, this is mine; I worked hard for this, I've watched this asset base grow, and now I'm going to decide -- I'm either going to use it for my retirement, if I want to, or I may decide to leave it to my son or daughter. Your choice. After all, it is your money.

I want to -- I want it so that people can say, I own something. The more people own something in America, the more people are going to say, I really care about the future of this country. The more people own their home, the better off we are. The more people own their own retirement system and watch it grow, the better off we are.

This plan is good for low-income people, particularly low-income women. Take a 20-year-old mom earning $8 an hour over her career; under my idea of things, when she retires at age 63, she'd have a $100,000 asset base, plus the Social Security plan. And that makes sense -- to spread the idea of ownership beyond just -- {APPLAUSE} -- the so-called "investor class." I think it does.

I'm particularly concerned about a system that hurts widows or spouses. If you -- think about the system today. You work all your life; say, you die before you're 62 years old; you worked 30 years, or 40 years, and you leave a widow. If she's working, like most families are now two working households, if she's working she'll -- when she turns time to retire, she'll get to choose her plan, her benefits, or the husband's benefits, which are ever higher, but not both. So the spouse has been working all its life -- his life -- putting a lot of money in the system, dies early, and the government says you can have one or the other but not both, even though they've been working hard to pay in the system, paying those payroll taxes.

If you allow somebody, if they so choose, to have a personal savings account, you've got yourself an asset that you can pass on to your spouse. It's your money. You can watch it grow and you can decide where that money goes. To me, this is a lot fairer system. It makes a lot of sense to trust the people with their money. {APPLAUSE}

So don't trust my judgment on this alone. Trust somebody else -- named Sam Beard. He's joined us. He's an expert. He's a fellow who has studied this issue a long time. He happens to be a Democrat. I first got to know Sam when I put together a panel headed by a former Senator from New York who was a Democrat, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. I got into office in 2001, I said -- and campaigned on it, by the way -- I said, give me -- I want to do something about Social Security if I win. And so I decided to put together a panel of Democrats and Republicans to see what they came up with. First of all, they had the right spirit about all this business. They didn't say, I'm serving on this to enhance one political party or another. They said, we're people who want to take an objective look: is there a problem, and if so, can we do something about it.

So, Sam, thanks for joining. Welcome. You might share some of your experiences on the commission. Were people trying to slug each other whole time there, or they actually have a good conversation? 

{/speech}
