{title} President Participates in Social Security Conversation in Arizona {/title}
{event} Tucson Convention Center, Tucson, Arizona {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} March 21, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you all. Thanks. Please be seated. {APPLAUSE} Thanks for the warm welcome. {APPLAUSE} It is nice to be back in Tucson. The last time I was here, remember, we we're up dealing with forest fires. And hopefully, the Healthy Forest legislation that we got passed, thanks to the help of John and John, and members of the Arizona congressional delegation, will help us preserve this valuable national treasure.

I'm here today to talk with some distinguished citizens from your state about Social Security. Before I do so, I'd say I've got some other things I want to talk about. {LAUGHTER} First, I want to talk about how much I enjoy working with Senator John McCain. I appreciate the job he's doing for the people of Arizona. {APPLAUSE} And I appreciate Senator Jon Kyl from the great state of Arizona. {APPLAUSE} I'm glad you're being nice to him, because he is on the Senate Finance Committee. {LAUGHTER} They're going to write the bill to make sure we have a Social Security system not only available for today's seniors, but for the next generation coming up. That's what we're here to talk about. Senator, thank you for your leadership on this issue. {APPLAUSE}

And how about Congressman Jim Kolbe -- appreciate you being here. {APPLAUSE} Jim Kolbe has taken a lead on this issue, as well. He's doing something that needs to happen -- he's reached across the aisle; he has found a Democrat partner to help come up with some ideas as to how to make sure Social Security is strong for generations to come. I'm proud of your leadership, Jim. I want to thank you. He said he's been working on this issue for quite a while. {APPLAUSE}

I'm proud that Congressman Trent Franks is with us, and his wife Josie. Thanks for coming. {APPLAUSE} Congressman John Shadegg is with us -- I appreciate you being here, John. {APPLAUSE} You allow people from Colorado in the state? Yes. Well, if that's the case, then why don't we introduce Bob Beauprez, Congressman from Colorado, and Congressman Joe Hefley. {APPLAUSE} McCain said, thank you for the water. {LAUGHTER}

Speaking about water, I had a fascinating discussion with your Mayor about water for Tucson. Mayor Bob Walkup and I actually have talked about water my last trip here. He told me that he was going to work to put a long-term plan in place to make sure this great city and this part of the world has got ample supplies of water. Mr. Mayor, thank you for your vision and thank you for your hard work on that issue. {APPLAUSE}

I'm proud we've got folks from the statehouse here -- Secretary of State Jan Brewer is with us. Madam Secretary, thank you for joining us. Good to see you again. {APPLAUSE} President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House are with us. We're honored you all are here. Thanks for coming. Good to see you men again. {APPLAUSE} We got supervisors, we got local officials. Mostly I want to thank the Tucson Chamber of Commerce for hosting this event. I appreciate you being here. {APPLAUSE} Steve Touche and Frank Camper, I'm honored that you all would -- and the Chamber members for inviting us to come and have a dialogue about a really important issue, which I'm working my way toward. {LAUGHTER}

I know you're playing baseball here. I wish the mighty Diamondbacks, with Ken Kendrick, all the best this year. Good to see you, Ken. Thank you, sir. Good luck. {APPLAUSE}

Russell Gursky is with us. Russell, thank you for coming. Russ, why don't you stand up. Hold your applause for Russell. Russell is right there. Oh, there he is -- sorry. There's Russell Gursky. He came to the airport; he is a volunteer -- 91 years old, still volunteering with the RASVP program, to provide help at the Tucson Police Department. I'm honored for your service. Thank you for volunteering. {APPLAUSE}

A couple of issues I do want to talk about, Democrats and Republicans in Congress came together last night to give Terri Schiavo's parents another opportunity to save their daughter's life. {APPLAUSE} This is a complex case with serious issues, but in extraordinary circumstances like this, it is wise to always err on the side of life. {APPLAUSE} I appreciate the work of the Senate and the House to get that bill for me to sign last night at about 1:08 a.m. -- or this morning, at about 1:08 a.m.

I also want to say something about the freedom agenda. I appreciate the strong support of Senator McCain, Senator Kyl, members of the congressional delegation for understanding that everyone desires to be free, that deep in everybody's soul is the desire to live in a free society. And they also understand -- {APPLAUSE} -- that free societies are peaceful societies, and that if you're interested in a peaceful world, which we're interested in, for our children and our grandchildren, the best thing to do is to spread freedom, which is precisely what is taking place. I want to assure you that over the next four years, we will work with our friends and allies to encourage those who live under tyranny to be bold and confident and to follow their hearts. We will work with friends and allies to make the world a more peaceful place by spreading freedom.

And freedom is on the march. Just think about what has happened in Afghanistan, for example. Millions went to the polls after they were shackled by the Taliban. We acted in our own self-interest; we upheld doctrine that said, if you harbor a terrorist, you're equally as guilty as the terrorist. As a result of our action, in self-defense, and defending America, millions of people in Afghanistan are now free. The first voter in the election was a woman. {APPLAUSE}

The Ukraine had elections. There will be a Palestinian state, a democracy living side-by-side with our close friend and ally, Israel, which will lead to peace. And then in Iraq, millions went to the polls in spite of the terrorists, in spite of the threats. You know why? People long to be free, and if just given the chance, they'll take the risk necessary to be free. {APPLAUSE}

These are exciting times. These are exciting times. And I appreciate so very much working with people in the United States Congress who understand the deep desire for all souls, regardless of religion or where they live, to realize the greatest gift the Almighty can provide, and that is freedom to each man and woman in this world. {APPLAUSE}

I've got one other issue I want to talk about. I appreciate the fact that our economy is growing. You've got a, I think, about a 4 percent unemployment rate here in the great state of Arizona. That's a good sign. People are working. Today, more people are working in America than ever before in our nation's history. And I want to thank the entrepreneurs who are here and the small business owners and the dreamers and doers and job creators. {APPLAUSE}

But like you, I'm concerned about our energy prices. I'm concerned about the fact that we're -- people are seeing more -- paying more at the pump. And so I urge the Congress to stop debating and get an energy bill to my desk. We need an energy bill that encourages more conservation; an energy bill that works on renewable sources of energy; an energy bill that modernizes the electricity grid; an energy bill that allows for environmentally safe exploration for natural gas in our own homeland. We do not need an energy bill that provides tax breaks for oil companies. We need an energy bill that is a -- that represents a broad strategy to encourage better use of energy and to find more energy so we become less dependent on foreign sources of energy. {APPLAUSE}

Now, let me talk about Social Security. First of all, right off the bat, I want to tell you, one of my predecessors did a smart thing. Franklin D. Roosevelt did a good thing in creating the Social Security system. The system has provided a safety net for millions of seniors. I want you to hear -- you'll hear it more than one time -- if you're a person now receiving a Social Security check, nothing will change for you. This United States government will keep our promise to people who have retired or near retirement. Nothing is going to change. I don't care what the flyers say, I don't care what the ads say, I don't care what the political rhetoric says; if you're getting a check, nobody is going to change the system for you. And that's important for you to hear.

Listen, I can understand people being nervous about a Social Security dialogue. You know, sometimes that just means because Bush and McCain and others are talking about it, that means somebody is going to take my check away. It's just not going to happen. The system -- the safety net is in good shape for people born prior to 1950.

There are holes in the safety net, however, for a generation of Americans coming up, and I'll explain to you why. The math has changed. The math has changed this way: Baby boomers like me are getting ready to retire, and there's a lot of us. I turn 62 in 2008 -- it's a convenient date for me to retire. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} We're living longer. We're living a lot longer today than people were living when Franklin Roosevelt created the system. You've got a lot of us baby boomers getting ready to retire, and we're living longer. Plus, for years people ran for office saying, vote for me, I'm going to increase your Social Security benefits if I get in, and they fulfilled those promises. My generation is going to be getting more -- a better benefit package than the previous generation. So you're beginning to get part of the equation: a lot of us, living longer, getting better benefits than the previous generation. But there's not a lot of people putting money in the system anymore.

You see, in 1950, there was 16 to 1 workers -- 16 workers for every beneficiary paying into the system. It means each worker didn't have much of a load to carry when it came to making sure that somebody who has retired got their benefits. Today, there are 3.3 to 1 -- 3.3 workers paying into the system. Soon, there will be two workers paying in the system. More people getting greater benefits, living longer, and fewer people paying for us. That's a problem. And it's a problem that begins to manifest itself in 2018, when the Social Security system goes into the red.

Now, let me tell you something about the Social Security system. It's not a trust. A lot of people think, well, we're collecting your money and we're holding it for you, and then when you retire, we're going to give it back to you. That's not the way it works. We're collecting your money, and if we've got money left over -- in other words, if the -- if there's more money than the benefits promised to be paid in our hands, we're spending it and leaving behind an IOU. That's how it works. It's called it's a pay-as-you-go system. You pay, we go ahead and spend it. {LAUGHTER}

In 2018, the system goes into the red, and every year thereafter if we don't do anything, if we do not address the problem, it gets worse and worse and worse. To give you an example, in 2027, the system will be $200 billion in the red. In other words, $200 billion more to pay for the retirements promised to people like me who are living longer than coming in in payroll taxes. And it's $300 billion about 12 years later. In other words, we've got a problem out there. It's not a problem for me, it's not a problem for one senior in Tucson who's receiving a check today. But it's a problem for your grandchildren.

You see, the question is how your grandchildren are going to pay for these promises the government has made. And that's what -- and that's the problem that Congress must address. See, my attitude is, I'm going to spend a lot of time traveling the country saying, here's the problem, and then say to people in Congress, bring your ideas.

So in my State of the Union address, I stood up and said all ideas are on the table except raising up the payroll tax rate -- all ideas. See, this isn't a Republican issue or a Democrat issue, this is a national issue that requires people of both parties to give a national response. That's what the people want, and that's what the people expect. The people expect people of good faith to take on an issue today so we can solve it for a generation to come. That's why we ran for office in the first place. {APPLAUSE}

A couple other points I want to make. Laura told me -- by the way, she's doing fabulous. I'm a lucky man to have married Laura Bush. {APPLAUSE} She just said, make sure you remember there's others on the stage who need to talk, too. {LAUGHTER} In other words, keep it short. But I'm just getting wound up. I've got a couple other things I want to share with you.

Congress needs to hear from the people that this needs to be a permanent fix. I mean, when we sit down at the table, let's make sure we solve this problem once and for all. Now, in 1983, President Reagan, Tip O'Neill, Bob Dole, I think, other members of the House and the Senate saw a -- saw a problem, they came together, and they put together what they call a 75-year fix. The problem is, we're about 22 years after 1983, not 75 years. The math is such that there's no such thing as a 75-year fix. They may tell you there's a 75-year fix, but there's not.

When we sit down at the table, my call to the United States Congress -- and I know Senator McCain agrees with me on this -- let's fix it once and for all. Let's do our duty and permanently fix Social Security. {APPLAUSE}

I want to share one other idea with you, and then we're going to talk to our panelists here. It's an idea that I know that has been in the news. It's an idea to allow younger workers to take some of your own money and set it aside as a personal savings account. {APPLAUSE} Let me tell you why I like this idea. First of all, it's voluntary. Nobody is saying to a younger worker, you must set aside a personal savings account. We're saying, you can if you want to, take some of your payroll taxes, and put it aside. After all, it's your money to begin with.

Secondly, a personal savings account in a conservative mix of bonds and stocks will yield a greater rate of return than money that -- that your money is earning now. And that's important, because over time, that money grows. Over time, there's a compounding rate of interest. Let me give you an example. If you're a $35,000 a year worker over your lifetime, and you're allowed to put a third of your payroll taxes into a personal account, and you start saving at 21, by the time you retire, that account will have accumulated $250,000. That will help you with retirement. See, money grows, and the better rate of return you get, the more the money grows. And the rate of return we're getting on your money now is abysmal compared to a mix of conservative bonds and stocks. And so, in other words, you get a better deal.

In order to fix permanent -- Social Security permanently, there needs to be some things we've got to do, and I've laid them out on the table. But this is a way to make the system work better for the individual. And I think we need to be thinking about the individual when it comes time to making the Social Security system work better, because if you allow a person to take some of their own money, and it compounds with a rate of interest, it means the nest egg that person is going to have is going to be more closely tied -- more closely resemble that which the government -- the promise the government can't keep.

You see what I'm saying? In other words, when we fix the system, there's promises the government has made that it can't keep. But one way to allow an individual worker, if they so choose, to have a retirement system that's closer to that promise is to allow that worker to get a better rate of return, a better compounding rate of return over time.

Secondly, I think if you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of the country. I think we ought to encourage ownership throughout America. I like the idea of people having their own account that they can manage themselves. {APPLAUSE}

Thirdly, I like the idea of people from all walks of life being able to own an asset and pass it on to whomever they choose. {APPLAUSE} That hasn't been the case throughout our history. If you think about the history of America, only a certain group of people have had assets they pass on. That's not the America I know. We want to encourage ownership throughout our -- all our society. You know, they say, well, only certain people can invest; this is too difficult. I just don't agree with that. I don't agree there's only a certain investor class in America. I think a society that's a hopeful society is one that encourages all people to own and invest. Please don't tell me only a certain kind of person can invest. You know how I know that that's not the case? We got this kind of plan already in place -- the federal employee thrift savings plan. I'm not here on stage inventing something new; I'm here saying, if this is good enough for federal employees to be able to take some of their own money and

So that's what I think we ought to consider, for the sake of the worker. I think we ought to say, you know, there's a 401 culture in America -- in other words, more and more people are investing their own money. They know what it's like. Why don't we extend this concept to make it available for younger workers, if they choose to do so. If a younger worker says, let me do this, it seems like to make a lot of sense to me for the federal government to say, you bet. We'll give you an opportunity to make sure you get a better deal out of the Social Security system.

And so I'm looking forward to discussing this idea with members of both political parties. It's a powerful idea. A lot of people have thought about it before me. A lot of Republicans liked it, a lot of Democrats thought it was an interesting idea in the past, and it ought to be on the table.

Now, we've got some people with us who know -- they know what they're talking about on this subject, starting with Lee Abdnor. Lee is right here to my left. Lee, tell us what you do. 

What Lee is talking about is when we first got into office in 2001, I think it was, is I asked Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, former colleague of John McCain's and Jon Kyl's, from New York, Democrat Senator, to chair a panel on Social Security. I saw it was a problem; others saw it was a problem. And they put together, we put together a group of eight Republicans and eight Democrats, who sat down at the table and said, why don't we come up with some ideas for Congress to look at.

First of all, I appreciate the spirit. If you noticed, eight Democrats and eight Republicans sat down at the table to discuss things in a positive way. It wasn't to sit down and say, my party is better than your party, or your party is deficient here. It was to sit down to say, we care deeply about the future of the United States of America and so why don't we sit down in the spirit of reform and discuss the issue.

And I want to thank you for serving on the panel, Lee. I presume there was no fistfights or anything else. {LAUGHTER}

And one of the interesting things that came out of this commission -- there was a guy named Posner on there, he's a Democrat fellow who put forth some interesting ideas that I know the Congress is looking at, and that we can make sure this system takes care of low-income retirees. In other words, there are ways to make sure the system is progressive. And I appreciated his suggestion, and it's an interesting idea that I know that some in the Senate are looking at and some in the House are looking at.

My point is, it doesn't matter who thinks of the idea, I think it's for the sake of the future of this country that people ought to sit down and put their ideas forward. Somebody who is willing to do so, and somebody who understands the need to get the job done is Senator John McCain. I want to thank you. He and I have discussed this issue a lot, and so I'm confident in telling you he cares deeply about the issue and is willing to take the risk necessary to work with people of both parties to get this problem solved.

Welcome, Senator. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
