{title} President Discusses Strengthening Social Security for Rural America {/title}
{event} Hopkinsville Christian County Conference and Convention Center, Hopkinsville, Kentucky {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} June 2, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thanks for the warm welcome. Please be seated. Thanks for the warm welcome. Glad I brought a little rain with me. {LAUGHTER} I'm honored to be here. I've got some friends -- just met them, but some folks from the community here who want to discuss Social Security with me and with you. It's a vital subject. But before I get there, I do want to say a couple of things.

First, it's such an honor to land at Fort Campbell, Kentucky. {APPLAUSE} I say "honor," because that base houses some of the finest men and women our country have ever known. {APPLAUSE} Men and women, and their families, who are making incredible sacrifices on behalf of the American people. They're doing some hard work to protect the country, and as they do that hard work, they're helping free people. We are laying the foundations for peace because more people are free in the world. And I want to thank those of you who support the base. {APPLAUSE}

Freedom is on the march. I was proud to see that Laura has a great trip overseas. She was advancing the freedom agenda, making it clear that free societies are societies that honor women and welcome women into the daily lives of government and business. {APPLAUSE} She sends her best. She's become quite the comedian over the last couple of weeks. {LAUGHTER} I love her dearly. She's a great First Lady and a wonderful wife. {APPLAUSE}

I appreciate knowing your Governor. I want to thank Governor Fletcher for doing a fine job for the people of Kentucky. {APPLAUSE} I know Congressman Ed Whitfield is traveling, but I think he sent his mom and dad here. Mr. and Mrs. Whitfield, thank you all for coming. There you are. Great to see you all. {APPLAUSE} Tell Ed I was asking about him. {LAUGHTER}

I want to thank all the state and local officials who have joined us today. I'm honored that you're here. I want to thank Mayor Liebe for being here. I want to thank those of you who serve in the city councils and county commissions, if that's what you call them here in Kentucky. Thanks for serving.

I want to tell you somebody else I met who's serving in an incredibly important way, and that is a fellow named Dr. John Cotthoff. {APPLAUSE} A couple of people have heard of him. {LAUGHTER} He came out to the -- to meet me at Air Force One. Every time I stop at a place, I ask somebody who has volunteered in the community to come out so I can herald volunteerism, so I can thank this one person in this one case for his kindness. He's a doc. He established a clinic in 1991, the St. Luke Free Clinic. He volunteers his time. He helps 4,000 working uninsured people get health care. He's an -- he's a soldier in the army of compassion. He's one of the millions of citizens in this country who have heard the universal call to love a neighbor just like you'd like to be loved yourself and are helping this country, one person at a time.

If you're a member of the army of compassion, I want to thank you for joining John. If you want to serve our country, feed the hungry, find shelter for the homeless, love somebody, teach somebody to read, and you'll be making a huge contribution to America just like Dr. John Cutthoff is. John, thank you for being here. I appreciate you coming. {APPLAUSE} Thank you, sir.

We got a lot to do in Washington, D.C., and there's too much politics up there. {LAUGHTER} Pure and simple. I'm calling on Congress to do a couple of important things. One of them is to make sure we're wise about how we spend your money. If the program doesn't wok we ought not to be spending money on it. {APPLAUSE}

I submitted a tough budget. Congress passed a tough budget and now it's time for them to make sure they don't overspend when it comes time to appropriating your money. {APPLAUSE} We've got a plan to cut our deficit in half in five years, and if they're wise stewards with your money, we will do that.

Secondly, four years ago I submitted a strategy to the United States Congress to make us less dependent on foreign sources of energy. And we've had four years of debate. This is the year where they've got to stop debating an energy bill and pass an energy bill that will encourage conservation -- {APPLAUSE} -- a bill that will encourage conservation, a bill that will modernize the electricity grid, a bill that will spend money on clean coal technology -- we've got a lot of coal in America; we could use technology to make sure we burn it cleanly. We've got to explore for oil and gas in environmentally friendly ways. We've got to spend money to use ethanol -- so we can use ethanol and biodiesel. {APPLAUSE} We've got a plan that will make us less dependent on foreign sources of energy.

Listen, I understand people are paying higher prices at the gas pump. I know that you're paying that tax -- it's like a tax that goes -- that money, and it's up because we're dependent. And the more dependent you are on somebody else's energy, the more likely it is you'll pay a higher price for it. And so I put a plan up there to get us to diversify away from the old habits and the old ways. The bill passed the House, it passed the Senate committee. It's now on the floor of the United States Senate. For the sake of economic security and national security, the Senate has got to get that bill passed; the House and Senate have got to reconcile their differences and get me a bill I can sign by August of this year. {APPLAUSE}

I want to talk about Social Security. Franklin Roosevelt did a smart thing when he set up the Social Security system. There's a lot of people who depend upon their Social Security check. I suspect there's a lot of people in this part of the world that depend on that check. I want to start off by telling those of you in Kentucky who get a check now from Social Security, nothing is going to change for you. You're going to keep getting your check. I don't care what the politicians say. I don't care what the advertisers say, I don't care what the pamphleteers say, nothing changes for you.

When you hear us talking about the Social Security system being in trouble, people who are getting their check have got to understand you're in good shape. It's the youngsters coming up who have a problem with Social Security. And I'll tell you why -- {APPLAUSE} -- let me tell you why. A lot of us are getting ready to retire. We're called baby boomers. See, my retirement age happens to be in 2008. I reached retirement age in 2008, which is a convenient year for me to retire. {LAUGHTER} And there's a lot of baby boomers, and we're living longer than the previous generation. So you're beginning to get a sense of the new math. Baby boomers -- I think when we fully retire, it's going to be about 73 million of us that the younger people are going to have to pay for. Right now there's over -- a little over 40 million retirees. So there's a whole lot of new retirees getting ready to retire soon who are living longer, which means younger folks are going to keep paying into -- paying for us longer and longer. And we've been promised greater benefits.

To complicate the problem for the younger generation of Americans, there are fewer people paying into the system for every retiree. In 1950, there were about 16 workers for every retiree. Think about that. So if the government made a promise, there was 16 of you that were able to divide up the promise. Today, there are 3.3 workers per retiree. Pretty soon there will be two workers per retiree. You got a lot of people getting ready to retire who will be living longer, drawing greater benefits, with fewer people paying in the system.

And we're paying into what's called a pay-as-you-go system. Now, that means you pay through payroll taxes, and we go ahead and spend. {LAUGHTER} We, of course, spend on retirement benefits. But that's not all that Congress has been spending your payroll tax on. See, a lot of people think they're sending their payroll taxes in and the government holds the money for them, and when it comes to retire, you get your money back. That's now how it works.

People are paying their payroll taxes; the beneficiaries are receiving their benefits, and there's been money left over. And that money has gone to government programs. And so all that's left in the Social Security trust is a file cabinet full of IOUs. And when those IOUs come due, somebody has to pay for them either through reduced benefits or greater taxes.

The pay-as-you-go system is -- really isn't fair, if you think about it. The government has said you're going to pay payroll taxes for your retirement, but they've gone ahead and spent your money on other government programs. And as a result of the pay-as-you-go system, with more people retiring, in 2017, the system goes into the red. In other words, more benefits will be going out than payroll taxes coming in. That makes sense. If you got fewer people paying in and more people retired, pretty soon it's going to catch up with you. And it does in 2017.

That's not very far down the road. If you've got a six-year-old child, that's -- the system goes in the red when you're child starts to drive. That is if you -- you have driver's licenses at 18 here, Ernie? Yes, 18. It was harrowing experience when our daughters -- 16, well, that's interesting, yes. {LAUGHTER} Let me know when they're on the road. {LAUGHTER}

And every year thereafter the system gets worse, because more people are getting benefits and they're living longer. In 2027, the amount of money coming in will be $200 billion less than the amount of money going out. Every year it gets worse from 2017 on. In 2032, I think it is, $300 billion a year. In other words, we're piling up an unsustainable system for younger workers. You got younger workers paying into a system that is going to go bankrupt in 2041, unless we do something about it.

So I saw a problem. If you take an objective look at the math, you can't help but see a problem. It's no problem for people who are getting their check today. If you're getting your Social Security here in Kentucky, you don't have a problem. But if you've got a grandchild, you do a problem -- or at least that grandchild does. And so I decided to put the issue up for discussion in Washington. I'll tell you why I did. The job of the President is to confront problems, is to deal with problems, not pass them on to future Presidents or future congresses. That's the job of the President of the United States. {APPLAUSE}

I suspect some in Washington wish I hadn't have brought it up, because some in Washington really don't want to deal with it. But every year we wait, we're saddling a younger generation with about $600 billion in costs. I mean, it's conceivable if we don't do anything that the payroll tax will have to go to 18 percent in order to make -- fulfill the promises for the baby boomers. And I don't think that's fair to a younger generation of Americans, to not have political courage and deal with the problem and pass on the problem to them. I just don't think it's right.

And so I've been traveling the country, spending a lot of time trying to impress the folks with two things right off the bat. One, we have got a serious problem, and if we don't do anything about it, we're saddling a young generation with a huge problem. And, two, if you get your check, nothing is going to change. I keep saying that because I understand the politics of Social Security -- if you don't want to get anything done, all you've got to do is go around the country trying to scare seniors. And then the seniors will say to the members of the Congress, please don't do anything. And so I'm going to spend a lot of time convincing seniors nothing changes -- and convincing folks there's a problem, because once the people realize there's a problem, then the next question they ask to their elected representative is, we've got a problem and I've sent you up to Washington to solve problems, and so what are you going to do about it? See, instead of just sitting up there, why don't you work with the Preside

I also have a duty to lay out some ideas, and so I have done so. I have -- I have suggested the following principles: one, that future generations should receive benefits equal to or greater than the benefits enjoyed by today's seniors. That makes sense to say to somebody who's paying in the payroll tax. If you're a youngster, you're paying in, the system ought to at least yield benefits equal to or greater than the baby boomers, for example.

Secondly, I believe the system -- I know the system can be designed so that someone who works all their life does not retire into poverty. That seems to make sense. You got a lot of people working hard in America and they're contributing to the Social Security system, and when they retire, they retire into poverty. To me, that's a system that is a flawed system. And so, therefore, I supported an idea, what's called progressive indexing. That's long Washington words for this: Right now benefits rise at the rate of wage increases. And so I proposed that the poor Americans, those at the lower end of the income scale, have their benefits continue to rise with wages; and that the upper-income folks have their benefits rise with inflation. In other words, all benefits go up, one set of benefits faster than others.

And if we're able to implement that plan, that solves a significant portion of the solvency issue for Social Security. Just think about that. By slowing down the rate of benefit growth -- benefits still grow, but at a slower rate, a rate in which government can now afford, a younger generation can afford to pay in, at a slower rate -- we solve a lot of the Social Security problem.

And so I put that on the table for people to consider. To me, it makes sense. To me, it's fair. Benefits go up; certain people's benefits will go up faster than others, depending upon their income level.

And so, then there's other options on the table that Congress needs to come and talk about. In good faith, they need to come -- set aside their political party and say, for the good of the country, why don't we come together and solve a significant problem.

I want to talk about one other idea that we're going to spend some time talking about today. In order to make Social Security a better deal for younger Americans -- in other words, what I've just laid out is a way to permanently solve the issue. But I think we ought to make it -- without raising taxes, by the way, without raising payroll taxes, which is important. {APPLAUSE} I think we ought to let younger workers, if they decide -- if they say, this is something I'd like to do -- is to take some of their own money that they're paying into the system through the payroll tax and set that money aside in a voluntary personal savings account.

Let me tell you why it will be a better deal -- and we're going to spend some time talking about this -- money grows over time. You hold money and you get a decent rate of return on that money, it tends to compound, it grows, the growth accelerates. That's just how it works. It's called the compounding rate of interest. Right now, when we collect your money, if you're a youngster out there working hard and paying into the system, you'll be displeased to know you get about a 1.8 percent return on your money, which is pitiful, rate of return. Heck, you can put your money in T-bills and do better than that.

I think we ought to allow younger workers to take some of their own payroll taxes -- remember, it's your money, and not the government's -- and set it aside, and be able to invest in a conservative mix of bonds and stocks, if that's what you choose to do. I recognize some people, that makes them nervous in America. You don't have to do it. It's a voluntary idea. In other works, you say, here's your option, if this is what you think makes sense. A conservative mix of bonds and stocks, for example, can yield over a period of time 4.5 percent rate of return. And that difference between the 4.5 percent somebody gets or the 1.8 percent you're now getting over a 30-year period is a lot of money. It's a lot of money.

And so, when I say better deal, it's a better deal for somebody to earn better interest on their own money. That makes sense. I mean, we tried it before, by the way. As a matter of fact, we're trying it now. This may interest you. This was such a good idea that members of the United States Senate and the United States Congress decided that in the federal retirement system, called the Thrift Savings Plan, that people, if they so choose, ought to be allowed to set aside some of their own money to get a better rate of return on their money. So here's my attitude and my message to the people in Washington, D.C. If you let yourself do it, if you think it's such a good idea for you, who's been elected to the Congress, then you ought to let workers have that same option. {APPLAUSE}

The personal savings account, the voluntary personal savings account would be a supplement to your Social Security check. It would be a part of a Social Security system, it's not "the" Social Security system. The government is going to say you can't put all your payroll tax, you can put a portion of your payroll taxes, and so you'll end up with something in the Social Security system, as well as your own nest egg that the government cannot take away. It's your own nest egg that the government can't spend on other government programs. It's your money. {APPLAUSE}

If you're a 20-year-old making $8 an hour over your career -- 20 years old today, $8 an hour over your career, and if the government lets you put a third of your payroll taxes in a voluntary personal savings account, you'll end up with a nest egg of $100,000 when you're 63. If you're a police officer and a nurse, who started working in 2011 and you work your entire careers, when you retire both of you will have a combined nest egg of $669,000 as part of your retirement package. That's how money grows.

I think it makes sense to let people, if they so choose, have an asset they call their own. It's beneficial for society. One of the things I've tried to do as the President is promote an ownership society. We want more people owning their own assets. We want more people owning their own home. We want to encourage entrepreneurship, so people can own their own small business. I think it makes sense to have people from all walks of life owning and managing their own assets, if that's what they choose to do. I reject the idea, soundly reject the idea that the investor class, the so-called investor class should be the only owners in America. I think ownership ought to be spread to every corner of America, for people of all walks of life, no matter what their demographic background may be, or no matter what their income level is. I like the idea of moms and dads being able to pass on assets to whomever they choose. {APPLAUSE}

A couple of other things -- I'm getting a little windy, aren't I? {LAUGHTER} Thank you. She said I'm on a roll. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

Just a couple of other points I want to make; then we'll go to some of our guests here -- not "some of our guests," all of our guests. First of all, there are rules. In other words, people say to me, well, you know, what happens if somebody makes a risky investment? The idea of having a voluntary personal savings account does not allow for -- you can't take your money to the lottery, or the track. {LAUGHTER} There's a conservative mix of bonds and stocks.

By the way, this happens all the time in our society where people are given some options in a rather conservative mix. It doesn't take much to get a better rate of return than government gets for you now. I was with John McCain at one of these events one time; he said he thought -- as he remembered, he got about a 7 percent rate of return on the conservative mix of bonds and stocks that he has held for about 20-some years. You put 7 percent onto a pretty good size of money, that grows rather quickly. And it's your money.

And so there will be rules. People say to me, well, Wall Street will benefit. No, we're not going to let Wall Street gouge people on this. I mean, that's just not going to happen. There will be a -- there will be reasonable fees. And, of course, the government will have an oversight role in all this business. It will be an opportunity for people if they so choose.

Let me tell you one other thing to -- that I think you'll find patently unfair about this system. You got a husband and a wife, and they've worked all their life, both contributing into the Social Security, and the husband passes away. And the wife will then be in a position to either have her own benefits, or her husband's benefits, but not both. In other words, somebody has been working -- the spouse has been working and one dies early, and both of them had been working all their life -- think about this system -- when it comes time to retire, the surviving spouse -- man or woman -- gets to choose his or her benefits, or the deceased spouse's benefits, which is ever higher, but not both. That means somebody has worked all their life and put money into the system that at some point in time just goes away.

And these are hard working people we're talking about in America -- people who have worked hard and paid that payroll tax. And if you're a youngster who just entered the work force, you know what it means to give some payroll tax. That's that first shock you get when you see that payroll tax coming out of your check. Imagine a system where you've worked all your life and it's not there. And so one of the reasons -- another reason I like somebody to be able to have assets that they can pass on to whomever they choose, here's an instance -- the example I just gave you says that a husband or a wife will have an asset base upon death to be able to pass on to the surviving spouse to help them out during this incredibly difficult period.

And so Congress needs to consider this idea. And I repeat, if it's good enough for you in the Congress, it ought to be good enough for working people here in America. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
