{title} President Discusses Social Security for Future Generations in Virginia {/title}
{event} James Lee Community Center, Falls Church, Virginia {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} April 29, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you all, very much. Thanks for the warm welcome. Thanks for coming today. I want to thank the Northern Virginia Technology Council for hosting this event. {APPLAUSE} Sudhaker Shenoy is the Chairman. Thank you, Sudhaker, I appreciate it, very much. {APPLAUSE} Bobby Kilberg is the President. {APPLAUSE} Obviously, you've stacked the audience with -- {LAUGHTER} I appreciate you coming.

We're here to talk about an important subject, and that's going to be the future of -- what the future holds for younger Americans, you know, is whether or not we've got the will and courage to make sure the Social Security system works for a younger generation.

Before we get there, I do want to say a couple of things. One, I'm sorry Laura is not with me. She is -- she's doing a fabulous job as the First Lady. I'm proud of her. I love her dearly. {APPLAUSE}

I appreciate Bill Howell, who is the Speaker of the House from the great Commonwealth of Virginia. Mr. Speaker, thank you for coming. I appreciate you being here. {APPLAUSE} Where's the Speaker? There he is. Thanks for coming, Speaker. Appreciate you serving.

I want to thank Tony Griffin, the Fairfax County Executive. I'm honored you're here, Tony. Thank you for coming. I want to thank the local and state officials who are here. I appreciate you're willing to serve your community and your state. I want to thank the Department of Community and Recreation Services, Pat Franckewitz and Joyce White, for opening up this beautiful facility. {APPLAUSE} And I want to thank our panelists for joining us here to have a discussion about Social Security.

Look, I -- a lot of people have said, why did you bring this up, you know? Why do you want to talk about the issue of Social Security when you don't have to. After all, the problem is down the road. I think the job of a President is to recognize reality, and if a President sees a problem, have the willingness to step up in front of the American people and say, we have a problem, explain the problem, and then go to the United States Congress and say, let's work together to fix the problem. The job of the President is to confront problems. {APPLAUSE}

I think the American people -- I know the American people expect those of us who have been elected to hold office to have set aside party politics and focus on solutions to problems confronting our country. That's what I know they expect. And that's the spirit in which I enter this debate. On one hand, my job is to confront problems, on the other hand, it's to call people together to solve them. And here's the problem with Social Security.

First, I want to praise one of my predecessors, Franklin Delano Roosevelt. He did a very smart thing when it came to creating a retirement system to help people have dignity in their final years of life. And Social Security has worked for a lot of folks.

The problem is the math is changing on Social Security. And the reason the math is changing is because there are a bunch of baby boomers, like me, getting ready to retire. I reach retirement age in four years. That's a convenient time. {LAUGHTER} Do you realize today there are 40 million retirees, and when the baby boomers fully retire, there's going to be 72 million retirees. In other words, there's a baby boomer bulge. And the groups of folks here, very soon, will be getting ready to count on a younger generation to pay its benefits that we've been promised.

The problem is, the benefits we've been promised are greater than the benefits promised to a previous generation, and those benefits rise faster than the rate of inflation. And to compound the problem is, we're going to live longer. You got a lot of people, living longer, getting greater benefits.

I'm sitting up here with some folks who are going to be paying into the system. What has changed about the payers into the system is that the number of payers are shrinking relative to those who are going to receive benefits. In 1950, 16 workers were paying into the system for every beneficiary. In other words, the load was pretty light. Today, there are 3.3 workers per beneficiary. Soon there's going to be two workers per beneficiary. Fewer workers, paying greater benefits to more people living longer -- that's the change in the math, that is what has changed from the time Franklin Roosevelt set up the program.

And what it means in terms of budgetary terms is that in 2017 the pay-as-you-go system goes into the red. Pay-as-you-go means, by the way, money comes in and it goes out; you pay, and we go ahead and spend. And we spend not only on retiree benefits, but we spend on every other program. And all that's left is file cabinets full of IOUs. You know, people think, well, the government has collected our money and they're going to hold it for us, and then when we retire, we'll give it back to you. That's just not the way it works. It is a pay-as-you-go system. And therefore, when you have a lot of baby boomers living longer, getting greater benefits, in a pay-as-you-go -- and more and more of us are getting what the government said, the system goes into the red, because you've got fewer payers.

In 2027 the obligations of the federal government to retirees will be $200 billion greater than the payroll tax receipts. See, starting in 2017, the system goes into the red, and it gets worse every year -- 2027, $200 billion; about 2030-something it's $300 billion, and eventually 2041 it's broke.

And the temptation, by the way, in Washington is to say, well, gosh, that seems like a long way down the road. But 2017 is not very far down the road. And if you're a younger worker, and you start paying into the payroll system today, and 2041 is about the time you start retiring, I'm telling you, the system is going to be bankrupt unless we do something about it. In other words, you're working all your life, you're putting money in, and by the time it comes for you to get ready to retire, there's nothing there. That's a problem, folks, and it requires a solution, requires people to come together to make this work.

And so my strategy has been, one, travel around the country, explain to the American people we have a problem. And they now understand we have a problem. The debate in Washington has shifted, by the way. Early on this year, people were saying, it's not really a problem. You know, we don't have a problem in America. I don't think you hear that anymore. Oh, there may be a few isolated voices saying, it's not a problem. Most people now understand we've got a problem.

My mission early on in this -- in the debate was to make it clear to seniors, you're going to get your check. There are a lot of people in this country counting on their Social Security check. And a lot of people are saying -- as a matter of fact, I went to the computer class and a lady said, you make sure I get my check. She's counting on it. And I recognize there's been a lot of propaganda. There's been propaganda in political campaigns saying, if, oh, so and so is elected, you're not going to get your check. And I'm sure there's some propaganda out there working its way through the system now, trying to frighten seniors.

But our seniors have got to understand the system is solvent for them. Nothing changes for people who were born prior to 1950. It's those born after 1950 that need to ask our elected representatives, there is a problem, and what you going to do about it?

I want to tell you what I think we ought to do about it. I think we ought to come together in good faith and discuss good ideas. I laid out some ideas -- I have been laying out ideas about what I think we ought to do. First, I know that we ought to be able to say in a new system, as we fix the safety net for future generations, that you must receive benefits equal to or greater than the benefits enjoyed by today's seniors. In other words, any reform has got to say that to those who are paying into the system.

Secondly, I think the country needs to set this goal for future generations: that if you've worked all your life and paid in the Social Security system, you will not retire into poverty. And there's a way to make that happen, and that is to have the benefits for low-income workers in a future system grow faster than benefits for those who are better off.

If Congress were to enact that, that would go a long way toward making the system solvent for a younger generation of Americans. I have a duty to put ideas on the table -- I'm putting them on the table. And I expect Republicans and Democrats to do the same kind of thing, and so do the American people.

The American people expect us in Washington, D.C. to do our duty and not play politics as usual with an issue as important as Social Security. When Congress comes together to discuss this issue, it's important for us to permanently fix Social Security. The reason I say that is because some of us were around in 1983 when Ronald Reagan called Tip O'Neill and said, we got a problem, and they came together and put together a 75-year fix. That's what they said. We got us a 75-year fix.

The problem is 25 years -- or 22 years after 1983, we're still talking about it. The 75-year fix lasted about 22 years. And so now is the time to permanently fix Social Security. Any solution that comes forth out of Congress must permanently fix it.

As we permanently fix it, we have a great opportunity to make the system a better deal for younger workers. And here's how: Younger workers should be allowed to take some of their own money, some of their own payroll taxes they pay into the system, and set it aside in a personal savings account. Now, this isn't the government telling you what to do, the government saying you must set aside a personal savings account. This is the government saying, you should have the option, if you so choose, to take some of your own money, some of the money that you've earned, and put it aside in a personal savings account.

And here's the benefit from such an idea. One, the government does not -- doesn't get a very good return on your money when we take it from you. If you were to put your money in a conservative mix of stocks and bonds, you would get a better rate of return. And that rate of return over time will make an enormous difference to somebody who wants to build a nest egg. Do you realize that stock investments have returned about 9 percent more than inflation per year since 1983, while the Social Security real return is only about 2 percent. That means if you were to invest a dollar in the market in '83, it would be worth $11 today, while your dollar in Social Security is worth $3. Think about what that means if you put a fair amount of money aside over time. It means your own money would grow better than that which the government can make it grow. And that's important.

It's an important part of being a part of a vibrant -- a retirement system. You're going to get a check from the government. The question is how big. If you're allowed to take some of your own money and watch it grow faster than the rate at which government can grow it, it means you've got a bigger nest egg.

Secondly, I like the idea of people owning something. We want more people owning their assets in America. There's kind of a concept around that says maybe only a certain kind of people should own assets, an investor class, maybe only the rich. I firmly reject that idea. That's not how I view America. I want more people owning things, owning their own home, owning their own business, owning their own retirement account, owning assets that they can pass one from one generation to the next. The more people that are able to do that, the better off America is.

Thirdly, the system today is patently unfair for families if a spouse is to die earlier than expected. Think about this kind of system we have today. You work all your life, your husband or wife works all their life, and one of you dies before 62 years old, or after 62 -- if they die before 62, you get no survivor benefits, you get a little stipend to help bury your spouse, period. All the money goes in, waits until you reach retirement age. When you reach retirement age, if you have worked, as well, you get either your spouse's benefits or your benefits, which are ever higher, but not both.

So if one of the two of you have worked all your life, or worked your life and put money in, you don't get anything as result of your labor. I think it will make sense to allow people to set aside some of their own money in a personal account so they have their own assets, and if they happen to die early, they can pass it on to their wife or husband. In other words, your assets just don't disappear like the current system encourages.

But you've got something you call your own, finally. I like an idea -- remember, this is a pay-as-you-go system. People are going to be counting on future Congresses to make decisions what to do with your money. I like the idea of you being able to have an asset base that the Congress can't take away. The Congress doesn't get to spend on your behalf, because it's your asset. You own it. It is your nest egg.

Personal -- personal savings accounts make a lot of sense to me. They also make a lot of sense to a generation of Americans that are used to investing. I was telling the folks up here that when I was in the 20s, I don't remember spending a lot of time thinking about my 401. It's because they didn't exist. Think about what's happened in our society. A lot of people are becoming accustomed to watching their money grow. There's a new and -- a group of investors from all walks of life that are comfortable with watching their assets grow and expect to be able to manage their own assets. The culture has changed when it comes to investing.

Now, people often ask me, you know, can I -- are there going to be wise ways to set up these savings accounts? Of course there will be. I'm not going to say, you can -- we want you to have a retirement fund; you can take your money and put it in the lottery. In other words, there's a conservative mix of bonds and stocks that will be available. If you're risk adverse, you can buy Treasury bonds, as far as I'm concerned.

You know, people say, well, you know, what happens if I'm getting close to retirement and there's a market swing? Well, when you get close to retirement, there are ways to diversify out of a mix of bonds and stocks and get into -- get into strictly bonds -- government-backed bonds. People can manage your money in smart ways. And the role of -- it seems like to me a proper role for the government is to say, here are the guidelines in which you can -- should be allowed to invest, but there's a lot of flexibility so you can choose how best to manage your own assets.

So this makes sense, and Congress needs to hear the voices of people who believe it is right and fair to give them the option to watch their own money grow. And we've got some people up here today that have got a pretty good idea about what they want to do with their own money.

Oh, by the way, just as an aside, I think it'll interest you to know that this isn't a new idea I'm discussing. As a matter of fact, Congress has given themselves the same opportunity that I think ought to be available for younger workers. There's what they call a thrift savings plan in Washington, D.C. It's available for federal workers. It says if you're unhappy with the government's rate of return, you ought to be able to set aside some of your own money -- manage your own money in a retirement account. Seems like to me that if a member of the United States Congress thinks it's okay to manage his or her money, that same privilege and opportunity ought to be extended to workers all across America. What's good for the Congress ought to be good for the working people in the United States. {APPLAUSE}

Doctor Olivia Mitchell is with us. She's an expert on the subject. PhD?

{OTHER-SPEAK} Yes, sir. {/OTHER-SPEAK} 

For those of you who are younger, I just want you to look at the examples being set here. Olivia is a PhD. I was a C student. {LAUGHTER} Olivia is the expert. I'm the President. {LAUGHTER} Anyway, thanks for coming. {APPLAUSE} A couple of B's, a couple of B's, yes. {LAUGHTER}

Tell us what you do, Olivia. 

{/speech}
