{title} President Participates in Social Security Conversation in North Dakota {/title}
{event} North Dakota State University, Fargo, North Dakota {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} February 3, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thanks for coming out. Please be seated. Thanks for coming. The Governor told me -- he said, you come over here to North Dakota, we might be able to get a few people around to discuss Social Security. I said, okay, I'll come. {APPLAUSE} Governor, looks like you got more than a few.

I'm honored so many came out to hear what I think you're going to find to be an interesting discussion about a very important issue. It's an issue that relates to our children's future; it's an issue that will determine whether or not those of us in elective office have got the courage and the wisdom to solve problems now. And that's Social Security.

But before I talk about that, I do want to thank our host, Joe Chapman, and North Dakota State University, for welcoming us here. {APPLAUSE} I'm glad a lot of the college kids are here because we're talking about something that's going to affect your life. That's what we're here to talk about. {APPLAUSE} And I want you to pay attention. {LAUGHTER} Something I didn't necessarily do when I was in college. {LAUGHTER}

I know the Bison Women's Basketball Team is playing pretty well -- after all, undefeated. Congratulations. {APPLAUSE} I want to thank the First Lady of North Dakota for being here. Mikey, welcome, thanks for coming. I'm proud of your -- proud of the job you're doing. {APPLAUSE} Governor Hoeven is doing a fine job, as well, and like me, he married well. {APPLAUSE}

I'm sorry Laura is not here.

{BOOING} 

Yes, that's generally the reaction, which is like -- {LAUGHTER} -- why didn't you send her and you stay at home? I get it. {LAUGHTER} But she is a unbelievably beautiful woman, great wife, terrific First Lady. {APPLAUSE}

I'm -- I was proud that the Governor was at the State of the Union address last night, and I was proud that he flew back from Washington with me, and I really enjoyed flying back, as well, with Senator Kent Conrad. I'm proud you're here, Senator. Thank you for coming. I enjoyed our visit. {APPLAUSE} And Senator Conrad asked permission if he could bring a Senator with him from another state. I said, fine, who is it? And he said, well, that would be Senator Conrad Burns from Montana. I said, bring him on. Welcome, Senator. I'm glad you're here. {APPLAUSE}

After here, we're going to Montana, then I'm going to Nebraska, then I'm going to Arkansas, and then I'm going to Florida. See, I think it's important to get out amongst the people and talk about important issues. And that's what I'm doing. {APPLAUSE} And Congressman Denny Rehberg is with us from Montana, as well. Denny, thank you for joining us, proud that you're here. {APPLAUSE}

Guess what we spent a lot of time talking about -- with the Senator -- both Senators and the Congressman and the Governor. We spent time talking about beef. {APPLAUSE} We spent time talking about the cattlemen and women of North Dakota and Montana to make sure people can make -- we spent time talking about rural health care, to make sure that people can find health care in America.

Let me tell you one thing we need to do to make sure people in rural America can find health care, and that's to do something about these junk lawsuits that are running good doctors out of practice. {APPLAUSE} Lawsuit after lawsuit after lawsuit is running up the cost of your health care, and it's making it hard for people to find a good doctor. I met too many women who are worried about their pregnancy because the OB/GYN they had been using is no longer in practice. We have a problem.

I used to think these problems could be solved at the state level, but I recognized that these frivolous lawsuits are running up the cost of medicine, and therefore, they're affecting federal budgets. I believe the medical liability crisis is a national problem that requires a national solution, and Congress needs to get a good bill to my desk this year. {APPLAUSE}

We also spent some time talking about energy. We've been debating energy for four years in the United States Congress. Now is the time to quit debating and get something done. And that means good conservation; it means renewable sources of energy like biodiesel and ethanol; it means clean, safe nuclear power. It means an energy plan that will make us less dependent on foreign sources of energy. {APPLAUSE}

I'll tell you what's going to be a great day for a President -- when somebody comes in with the crop report and says that the amount of corn is up, and therefore, were less dependent on foreign sources of energy. I believe it's possible. And I believe it's a wise use of taxpayers' money to explore ways to develop energy here at home that's renewable, clean and safe. {APPLAUSE}

I want to thank your Lt. Governor Jack Dalrymple, and Betsy, for being with us. Governor, thanks for coming. Betsy, I appreciate you being out at the airport. {APPLAUSE} I want to thank the Attorney General for being here today. Mr. Attorney General, thanks for coming. I want to thank the leaders of the House and the Senate who have joined us. I appreciate my friend, Ed Schaefer and Nancy -- the former governor of North Dakota and former First Lady. {APPLAUSE}

We're both members of the ex-governors club. {LAUGHTER} Tired old guys who can't run anymore. {LAUGHTER} But I fondly remember the Schaefers during our tenures as governors of our respective states. It's great to see you all.

I met Fran Rickers today at the airport. She was out there, standing right there when I came off the airplane, on Air Force One. Fran is a volunteer at the Veterans Center. And the reason I bring that up is, as I mentioned last night in the speech, one of the great values of America is compassion. And one of the great strengths of America is the fact that thousands of our citizens volunteer on a daily basis. It doesn't even require a federal law, by the way. {LAUGHTER} They do it out of the goodness of their heart. They do it because they're answering a call to love a neighbor just like they would like to be loved themselves.

If any of the youngsters who are here are interested in how you can serve our country, find somebody whose heart needs healing, find somebody who's hungry, find somebody who is looking for shelter, and make that person's life better. You see, you can serve America and change our country one heart, one soul, one conscience at a time. {APPLAUSE}

Fran, I want to thank you for setting such a good example by volunteering your time at the Veterans Center. {APPLAUSE}

Before I get to Social Security, I do want to talk about how amazing these past couple of months have been in the history of our world. I want the youngsters here to think about what has happened in such a brief period of time. First, there were elections in Afghanistan. Now, that's -- {APPLAUSE} Are you from Afghanistan? From? You're from Iraq?

{AUDIENCE-MEMBER} {COMMENT="Inaudible"} {/AUDIENCE-MEMBER} {APPLAUSE}

Yes -- thank you. Thank you. {APPLAUSE} Okay, wait a minute, you got ahead of the story. {LAUGHTER} You got me to Iraq before we even got out of Afghanistan. {LAUGHTER} You see, Afghanistan used to be a training center, a safe haven for al Qaeda. That's where they plotted the attacks on America.

So I set out a doctrine that said, if you harbor a terrorist, you're equally as guilty as the terrorist. We enforced the doctrine to protect ourselves. And by doing so, we removed the Taliban from power, and when that happened, it gave the chance for the Afghan citizens to rise up and vote, and to develop a democracy -- {APPLAUSE} And it happened. Millions of people voted. {APPLAUSE}

There was a vote in the Ukraine that elected a new President. There was a vote in the Palestinian Territories that elected Abu Abbas as the leader. And then, as you know, last Sunday -- I'm getting to you -- {LAUGHTER} -- the people of Iraq, when given a chance, went to the polls and said, we reject terrorism and we love freedom. That's what they said. {APPLAUSE}

And that matters. Let me tell you why it matters. It matters because free societies are peaceful societies. It matters because in the long run, as freedom spreads, our children and grandchildren will more likely grow up in a peaceful world.

This good-hearted country of ours longs for peace. We will do everything to defend ourselves against the threats of this era, and as we do so, we will spread freedom, because we know that freedom leads to peace, and that's what we want. {APPLAUSE}

The interesting -- the lessons we should take away from what happened in the last four months is that, deep within everybody's soul is the desire to be free. It doesn't matter where you're from or the nature of your religion, freedom is universal. Freedom is God's gift to every single person in this world. And if given the chance, people -- people will express their desire to be free and take great risks to do so, like you saw in Iraq.

Last night there was a touching moment when the mom and the vote hugged each other. It was a sincere expression of compassion and appreciation by a woman whose dad had been -- whose assassination had been ordered by Saddam Hussein, who now had finally been given a chance to vote. It was an indication to me, and I think our country, that the Iraqi people so appreciate the sacrifices, especially those by our military and the military families, in order to free them. {APPLAUSE}

These are historic times. We're living in historic times. Freedom --

{AUDIENCE-MEMBER} Mr. President, thank you for liberating Iraq! {/AUDIENCE-MEMBER} 

You're welcome.

{AUDIENCE-MEMBER} You are right; they are wrong! We are -- all the way with you! {/AUDIENCE-MEMBER} 

Thank you, sir. {APPLAUSE} Nothing better than a little free speech to liven up the crowd, you know. {APPLAUSE} Very well-spoken. Got it. Got the message. {LAUGHTER}

These are historic times, and the United States of America will continue to lead with friends and allies by our side. I set a goal in my inaugural speech that said, over the generations, over time, the free world must work to end tyranny. If you believe that freedom is the Almighty's gift to every soul, it makes sense to assume the duty to work with others to spread freedom so everybody, every soul can be free. That's what I believe the role of America must be. {APPLAUSE} That's the call of our generation. And in so doing, we'll leave a peaceful world behind for our children and grandchildren.

Thank you for letting me share that with you. I'm -- as you can tell, I'm upbeat about where we're headed. {APPLAUSE}

And so the subject at hand is Social Security. Now, Social Security worked. We're going to talk to a soul who will tell you how important Social Security is to her and her family. Not yet. {LAUGHTER} Pretty soon. {LAUGHTER} And it's been important, and it's worked. But the problem is, Social Security has changed dramatically since it was created. You see, when it was created, most people's life expectancy was, what, around 60 years old, I guess. And today, people are living longer.

There was -- in 1950, there was 16 workers, as this chart will show you, paying for every beneficiary. In other words, there's a lot of workers putting taxes in to pay for the benefits promised. That made it easy to fund the system. Today, there are about 3.3 workers. When the college kids here get older, there's going to be two workers.

The benefit structure has gone up over time. And so you've got fewer workers paying for more retirees who are living longer, greater benefits. And if you start kind of thinking about the math there, you begin to realize, we've got a problem. In other words, there's not enough money coming into the system to pay for the promises for all those who are retiring, like baby boomers like me. There's a bunch of us getting ready to retire. We're living longer, we've been promised greater benefits, and there's few people -- fewer people writing the check. In other words, the system has changed.

Now, if you're retired or near retirement, you don't have a thing to worry about. The Social Security trust is solvent. As I said last night, and I will continue to say, for those of you who have received your check or about to receive a check, not one thing will change. That's a fact. I fully understand that oftentimes when they stress the Social Security issue, people try to scare you about it, saying, if old George W. has his way, you're not going to get a dime. Well, that's not the way it's going to work. The truth of the matter is, you're going to get your checks if you're -- if you're retired or near retirement. It's just a fact.

The problem comes from younger folks. That's the problem. The math doesn't work. As a matter of fact, as you can see from this chart, starting in the year 2018, more money goes out of Social Security than comes in. Right now, it's the other way around. More money is coming in than is going out. But a bunch of baby boomers who are going to live longer and have been promised greater benefits are fixing to retire. And so the system goes into the red. And it goes into the red -- that means negative, that means losing money -- quite dramatically. In the year 2027, it will be $200 billion in the red -- $200 billion for one year alone. And in 3032, it's like $300 billion. And in 20 -- I mean, 2032. And in 2042, it's bust.

Now, for people who have been elected, I guess that seems like a long time down the road. If you've got a two-year horizon, you're only thinking about two years -- or four years, in my case. But I believe the role of a President, and I believe the role of a Congress is to confront problems and not pass them on to future generations. I believe that -- {APPLAUSE} It's a problem when you're $200 billion a year short. Now, what does that mean? It means you either have to run up taxes, cut benefits, cut programs, or borrow money. That's what it means. In big ways.

And so I went to Congress last night and said, I see a problem. Some of them doesn't see -- didn't see the problem, evidently. A lot of them do. A lot of really good people on both sides of the aisle recognize we have a problem. I'm going to spend the next couple of days going around the country explaining to people as clearly as I can, the problem, because I expect people in Congress, when they see a problem, to then come up with solutions.

And so last night, I said, all options are on the table expect for running up payroll taxes. {APPLAUSE} I said, everybody -- all different -- all different ideas as to how to solve the problem are on the table. And that's important for members of Congress to hear. In other words, we're not going to play politics with the issue. We're going to say, if you've got a good idea, come forth with your idea, because now is the time to put partisanship aside and focus on saving Social Security for young workers. {APPLAUSE}

I put out an idea last night that I think is important. It's a novel way of saying to young workers, we understand whose money we're spending; and two, we want you to be able to have more security in your retirement -- and that is to allow younger workers to take some of their own payroll taxes and set aside -- set it aside in what's called a personal retirement account, a personal retirement account that will earn a better rate of return than the current Social Security trust earns; a personal retirement account which you will call your own; a personal retirement account that can be only invested in conservative stocks and bonds; a conservative account that you can't withdraw all your money upon retirement. But it's your own account, and it grows. And it supplements Social Security. In other words, you'll get a Social Security check, but you'll also be able to withdraw money from your own personal retirement account to supplement that money.

And why it's a good deal for younger workers is, is because it compounds at a rate of interest faster than the money inside the Social Security trust. You start setting aside money at a young age, it grows over time. It's your money. It's money that you can decide to leave to whomever you want. It's money that the government can never take away. It's an interesting idea -- {APPLAUSE} -- it's an interesting idea to make sure the Social Security beneficiaries of the future get as close to that which the government is possible -- guaranteed is possible -- has promised as possible, but it's a new idea to encourage ownership in our society. You know, federal employees have this under the thrift savings plan, this kind of idea. If it's good enough for federal employees, it ought to be good enough for workers out there working every single day, it seems like to me. {APPLAUSE}

Now, I've heard all of the complaints, and you'll hear a lot more -- how this is going to ruin Social Security. Forget it, it's going to make it stronger. We're going to phase it in so that we can be more fiscally responsible with the budget. And I want to work with Congress on the idea. I mean, I think it makes sense to put out new ideas for an old and important system to make sure it works. And that's exactly what we are doing, and I did last night. I want the people, as I travel around this country, to know, one, there's a problem; two, I'm willing to work with members of both parties to come up with a solution; and three, I've got an innovative idea as to how to benefit the younger workers in America. 

{/speech}
