{title} President Discusses Medical Liability Reform and Health Care in Ohio {/title}
{event} Canton Palace Theater, Canton, Ohio {/event}
{speaker} George W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} October 22, 2004 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Go ahead and be seated, please. We've got some work to do. Thank you all for coming today. First of all, George, thank you for that strong endorsement. I am proud to have George in my corner, just like I'm proud to have thousands of Democrats all across the state of Ohio who understand if they want a safer America, a stronger America, and a better America to put me and Dick Cheney back in office. {APPLAUSE}

Thank you, sir.

I'm keeping mighty good company today. So I don't know if you know this or not, but Laura and I were in the 7th grade together at San Jacinto Junior High in Midland, Texas. And then we became reacquainted when she was a public school librarian in Texas. I asked her to marry me. She said, fine, I will marry you, but make me one promise. I said, what is it. She said, never make me give a speech. {LAUGHTER} I said, okay. You've got a deal. Fortunately, she didn't hold me to that promise. Laura is a great speaker, and when she does, the American people see a compassionate, warm, wonderful First Lady. {APPLAUSE}

So I have been telling the girls, one of these days, we'll take the family camping trip. {LAUGHTER} They envisioned the Grand Canyon, the wilds of Alaska. Girls, this is it, the 2004 campaign. {LAUGHTER} We love them dearly. I'm proud of Barbara and Jenna. Thank you all for campaigning so hard. {APPLAUSE}

Thanks for coming today. I'm back in the great city of Canton because I'm here asking for the vote. I'm here to describe to you what I intend to do over the next four years to make this country a better place. I believe you have to get out amongst the people and ask for the vote. We've got a very unusual way of making some points today. As you can see, I've been joined by some citizens from Ohio here on the stage. We will listen to their stories. I think it'll help the people of Ohio understand why I have made some of the decisions I have made.

Before I begin, though, I want to thank your Governor Bob Taft for joining us today. Governor, great to see you. {APPLAUSE} I want to thank Jennette Bradley, the Lieutenant Governor. Thanks for coming, Governor. You look great. {APPLAUSE} Congressman Ralph Regula -- appreciate you being here, Congressman. {APPLAUSE} Laura and I were looking forward to seeing the wife, but, no, of course. She's probably out mowing the lawn like you should be doing. {LAUGHTER}

Listen, you've got a great United States Senator in George Voinovich. He doesn't need a poll or a focus group to tell him what to think. He stands on principle. You know where he's coming from. He doesn't shift in the wind like some other United States senators I know. {LAUGHTER} Put him back in office. {APPLAUSE} And I'm proud -- I'm proud of Mike DeWine. A fine United States Senator, as well. We're -- Laura and I are proud to call both George and Mike, friends.

Today, when I landed at the airport, I met Dan Yeric who's sitting right there. Dan, why don't you wave your hand. Thanks for coming. Dan has been a volunteer at the Akron Children's Hospital for 12 years. The reason I bring him up is the strength of this country lies in the hearts and souls of our fellow citizens. The true strength of America is not our military might, it's not the size of our pocketbook. The true strength of America is in the hearts and souls of citizens who are working to change this country one person at a time, those who've heard the call to love a neighbor just like they'd like to be loved themselves. Dan is a soldier in the army of compassion. Thank you for your example. Thank you for your care. {APPLAUSE}

We're getting close to voting time. Who's counting the days? {LAUGHTER} And I'm here to ask for your help. I believe, with your help, we will carry Ohio again and win a great victory in November. {APPLAUSE}

So Laura and I and the girls are here to thank you for what you are going to do over the next less than two weeks: call the phone, get on the phone and call the voters, put up the signs, find those discerning Democrats like the mayor, independents, Republicans. Get people to do their duty and vote.

And when you do, as you get them out to vote, remind them what this economy has been through. I know there's tough times here in Ohio. Remind everybody what we have been through. You might remind them, starting with this point. The stock market was in a serious decline six months prior to my arrival in Washington, D.C. And then we had a recession. In other words, that stock market decline was an indicator that the economy was heading south, and it did.

And then we had some corporate scandals. We passed tough law to make it abundantly clear we're not going to tolerate dishonesty in the boardrooms of America.

And then we got attacked. And those attacks cost us nearly a million jobs in the three months after September the 11th, 2001. Our economy has been through a lot. But we acted. We cut the taxes to spur consumption and investment and our economy is growing. {APPLAUSE}

We raised the child credit to help people with kids. We lowered the marriage penalty. Listen, we don't want a tax code that penalizes marriage. We want a tax code that encourages marriage. {APPLAUSE}

We reduced rates on everybody who pays taxes. I don't think you ought to be trying to pick and choose winners when it comes to tax relief. If you pay taxes, you ought to get relief. We helped our small businesses. We encouraged investment. Our economy has been growing at rates as fast as any in nearly 20 years. We've added 1.9 million new jobs since August of 2003. This month of September, in the last month, that being September, the state of Ohio added 5,500 new jobs. Your unemployment rate dropped from 6.3 to 6 percent. We're moving forward. {APPLAUSE}

I signed a bill that's going to help our manufacturers. It will save $77 billion over the next ten years for the manufacturing sector of America. That will help keep jobs here. It's a bill that extended the $100,000 expensing deduction, expensing allowance for small businesses. That will help keep jobs here in Ohio. It closes corporate loopholes. It repeals the 4.3 -- 4.3 percent tax on railroad diesel and barge fuel. That will help keep jobs here in Ohio.

To keep jobs here, we've got to have less regulations on our job creators. To keep jobs growing in Ohio, we need to do something about the junk lawsuits that plague the job creators in the state of Ohio. {APPLAUSE}

It's important for us to open up markets for U.S. products, for markets, for crops grown right here in the state of Ohio. Listen, we've opened up our market, and it's good for consumers. Here's the way the market works. If you have more products to choose from, you're like to get that which you want at a better price and higher quality. So rather than hurting our consumers, what I'm saying to places like China, you treat us the way we treat you. You open up your markets, because we can compete with anybody, anytime, anywhere, so long as the rules are fair. {APPLAUSE}

To keep jobs here, we need an energy plan. I proposed one to the United States Congress over two years ago. It's a plan that encourages conservation, a plan that encourages the use of renewables. It's a plan that recognizes we can use technologies to protect our environment and at the same time, burn coal and find natural gas. It is a plan that recognizes in order to keep jobs in Ohio, in order to expand the job base here in this state and other states, we must be less dependent on foreign sources of energy. {APPLAUSE}

In order to make sure jobs are here, we've got to do a good job of educating our people. I told the people when I ran I was going to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations, you know, the system that just shuffled kids through the schools grade after grade, year after year, without teaching the basics. I kept my word. We passed the No Child Left Behind Act. It raises standards. It spends more money. But in return for more money, we're now measuring. You cannot solve a problem unless you diagnose the problem. We're diagnosing problems early now, and more and more of our children are learning to read and write and add and subtract, and we're not going to go back to the days of mediocrity in our classrooms. {APPLAUSE}

Education is more than just elementary school. We'll extend high standards to our high schools. We'll emphasize math and science. We'll continue to expand Pell grants so low- and middle-income Americans can start their career with a college diploma. We're going to continue to expand access to community -- community colleges so that people actually have the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century.

I'm going to also remind you that to make sure our economy grows, we've got to keep your taxes low. And taxes are an issue in this campaign. They are a significant issue, and I'll tell you why. My opponent has proposed $2.2 trillion of new spending thus far. That's trillion with a "T." {LAUGHTER} That's a heck of a lot, even for a Senator from Massachusetts. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

So they asked him, how are you going to pay for it? And he pulled out that same old line, that class warfare line: Don't worry, we'll pay for it by taxing the rich. You can't raise enough money to pay for $2.2 trillion of new spending by taxing the rich. He says he's going to raise the to two brackets. I'll tell you three things about that. One, most small businesses are subchapter-S corporations or limited partnerships, which mean they pay tax at the individual income tax level. And when you're running up the top two brackets, you're taxing about 900,000 to a million small businesses all across America. Guess what. Seventy percent of new jobs in America are created by small businesses. It makes no sense to tax job creators. {APPLAUSE}

Secondly, there is a tax gap. There is a difference between what he has promised, $2.2 trillion, and what he can raise. Now, guess who usually gets to fill that gap? Yes, you do.

Thirdly, the so-called rich hire lawyers and accountants for a reason when it comes to tax time, to slip the bill and pass it onto you. The good news is, we're not going to let him tax you. Taxes would be bad for our economy. If you want to make sure you keep jobs here in Ohio, you keep the taxes low. We're not going to let him tax the American people because we're going to win in November. {APPLAUSE} He can run -- he can run, he can even run in camo -- {LAUGHTER} -- but he cannot hide. {APPLAUSE}

A couple of other things I want to share with you, and then we're going to talk about health care, as you can see. I want to talk about promoting an ownership society in America. You know, it's said that no one ever washes a rental car. {LAUGHTER} There's some wisdom in that. {LAUGHTER} When you own something, you care about it. If you own your own small business, you care about the future of America. Do you realize that the home ownership rate under my administration is at an all-time high in America? {APPLAUSE} We're going to talk about health savings accounts in a minute, but this is a way for people to own their own health care and manage their own health care in a way that makes sense for American families and American small businesses.

I want to talk about Social Security and ownership. The 2000 campaign, I remember it clearly. During that campaign, people ran advertisements that said if George W. gets elected, our seniors will not get their Social Security checks. You might remember those ads. It's kind of the old typical political scare tactic. Well, as you're out gathering up the vote, remind our senior citizens, I did get elected, and you got your checks. And I'm going to get elected again, and you're still going to get your checks. {APPLAUSE}

The reason I bring that up is because I'm willing -- I'm willing to talk about how to make sure the Social Security system is available for our children and our grandchildren. It is necessary to do so. See, we're in good shape as a baby boomer. The money in the trust; there's enough people paying in that we'll be taken care of. We need to worry about the children and grandchildren. We need to worry about whether or not Social Security will be available for them. In order to make sure Social Security is available for our young, I believe younger workers ought to be allowed to take some of their payroll taxes and set up a personal savings account that will earn a greater rate of interest -- rate of return on their money than it does in the current Social Security trust, a personal account they can call their own, a personal account they can pass on to whomever they want, and a personal account the government will never take away. {APPLAUSE}

And here we have -- here we have another difference in this campaign. See, I believe a President ought to confront problems and not pass them on to future Presidents and future generations. And we have a problem in Social Security. You might remember one of our debates when my opponent said, well, the status quo was fine. Let me remind you of two things about that. One, he is the only person on that stage during the debate that voted to tax Social Security benefits, not once, but eight times. And secondly, the status quo is not fine when it comes to our children. A President must be willing to confront problems. And in a new term, I'll bring Republicans and Democrats together to make sure Social Security is available for the younger generation. {APPLAUSE}

Now, let me talk about health care. We have a clear choice when it comes to health care in this campaign. I have a common-sense approach to make sure health care is available and affordable. Available through places like community health centers, where the poor and the indigent can get health care and relieve pressure off of the emergency rooms of the hospitals all across the country. Available by making sure our children of low-income families are fully subscribed in the government program for them. Affordable by recognizing that most of the uninsured in America work for small businesses and, therefore, small businesses ought to be allowed to pool risk across jurisdictional boundaries so they can buy insurance at the same discounts that big companies are able to do. {APPLAUSE}

Affordable through health savings accounts, which we'll discuss. Health care more affordable by moving generic drugs quicker to the market so our seniors are able to better afford prescription drugs. Affordable because I'm the first President to have taken on Medicare -- I shouldn't say that, other Presidents have talked about Medicare. It used to be called, "Mediscare," because anytime you talked about it, somebody would club you over the head with it as an issue, political issue. But I went to Washington to solve problems. And we had a problem in Medicare. Medicine was changing, medicine was modernizing; Medicare wasn't. We pay tens of thousands of dollars for a heart surgery for a Medicare patient, but not a dime for the prescription drugs that could prevent the heart surgery from being needed in the first place. That didn't make any sense. So I brought Republicans and Democrats together; I signed a good Medicare bill that says, in 2006, our seniors will get prescription drug coverage. {APPLAUSE}

To make sure health care is available and affordable, we have got to do something about these frivolous and junk lawsuits that are running up the cost of medicine and running good doctors out of practice. {APPLAUSE} We're going to talk about that issue in a minute. We're going to talk about that issue in a minute, but I do want to make it very clear there is a difference of opinion between me and my opponent on health care. In one of the debates he said -- he looked right in the camera, he said, the government doesn't have anything to do with it -- referring to his health care program. Stared right in the camera and said it -- I could barely contain myself. {LAUGHTER}

Government has got a lot to do with it. Eight out of ten people that would be signed up for health insurance on his program would end up on a government program. When you raise the limits of Medicaid, it provides an incentive for small business owners to provide no insurance for their employees because the government will pick it up. And therefore, millions of people will go from private insurance to the government rolls. His is a plan that creates 225 new mandates for small businesses. Government-run health care does not work. We have got a great health care system in the world because it's innovative, because it's -- private medicine is at the center of our health care system. And my opponent's plan would increase the scope and the size of the federal government when it comes to your health care decisions.

In all we do to make sure health care works, we'll make sure the decisions are between patients and doctors, not by officials in Washington, D.C. {APPLAUSE}

Up here with me is Michael Gordon. No, not Michael Gordon. He didn't make it. Michael Gordon was supposed to be here -- he's a small business owner. Let me talk about Michael Gordon right quick. He's stuck out there. Probably behind a barricade chanting, "Four more years." {LAUGHTER}

{AUDIENCE} Four more years! {/AUDIENCE} 

Oh, Michael, you made it! {LAUGHTER}

Anyway, he's from Tendon Manufacturing. He's a small business. He's adding employees. He's optimistic -- a small manufacturing company here in Ohio. He is a sub-chapter S corporation. I wish Michael were sitting up here so you could see him. He's a sub-chapter S. He's expanding his business. When you run up the top two brackets of the tax code, you're taxing Michael. You're taxing his company. It makes no sense to tax the small business job creators, which is precisely what Senator Kerry will do.

{/speech}
